Arquivo 001 - http://www.railway-technical.com/
The Railway as a System. A railway is a system. It comprises many parts that fit together to make the system work. If any of the parts fail to operate correctly, the system will quickly stop functioning and the railway’s customers, both freight and passengers, will see a deterioration in the service provided.

What is a railway?
A railway may be defined as a high value, fixed guidance land transport system, carrying passengers and freight in purpose-built containers, using specifically designed, high power traction systems and controlled by high integrity safety systems. Railways are subject to strictly regulated safety regimes, require reliable long distance communications and specially trained staff meeting defined medical requirements, sometimes working alone in hostile environments. The costs of construction, operation and maintenance of a railway do not normally offer a commercial return on investment and therefore requires substantial government subsidy, thus bringing with it a high degree of intrusive political interference and often malevolent media reporting. 
The life of railway assets is usually in the range of 20-40 years for electrical and mechanical systems and 60-120 years for fixed civil engineering infrastructure, assuming properly managed and regular maintenance. This life cycle drives a need for a long term approach to the initial system design, to the strategic management of existing systems and to the development of replacement strategies. 



Arquivo 002 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/electric-traction-power.html

There is a wide variety of electric traction systems around the world and these have been built according to the type of railway, its location and the technology available at the time of the installation. Many installations seen today were first built more than 100 years ago, some when electric traction was barely out of its diapers, so to speak, and this has had a great influence on what is seen today.

In the last 20 years there has been a rapid acceleration in railway traction development. This has run in parallel with the development of power electronics and microprocessors. What had been the accepted norms for the industry for sometimes, 80 years, have suddenly been thrown out and replaced by fundamental changes in design, manufacture and operation. Many of these developments are highly technical and complex, the details of which are therefore beyond the scope of these texts.

Because the changes have been so rapid, there are still plenty of examples of the original technology around and in regular use, so I have covered these in my articles. This is useful, since it helps the reader to get to grips with the modern stuff.

Power Supply

To begin with, the electric railway needs a power supply that the trains can access at all times. It must be safe, economical and user friendly. It can use either DC (direct current) or AC (alternating current), the former being, for many years, simpler for railway traction purposes, the latter being better over long distances and cheaper to install but, until recently, more complicated to control at train level.

Transmission of power is always along the track by means of an overhead wire or at ground level, using an extra, third rail laid close to the running rails. AC systems always use overhead wires, DC can use either an overhead wire or a third rail; both are common. Both overhead systems require at least one collector attached to the train so it can always be in contact with the power. Overhead current collectors use a "pantograph", so called because that was the shape of most of them until about 30 years ago. The return circuit is via the running rails back to the substation. The running rails are at earth potential and are connected to the substation.

Arquivo 003 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/electric-traction-power.html

Shoes and Shoegear

Third rail current collection comes in a variety of designs. The simplest is what is called "top contact" because that’s the part of the rail upon which the pick-up shoe slides
There is also a side contact system. Side contact is not much better than top contact but at least it is less exposed. Bottom contact is best - you can cover effectively most of the rail and it is protected from the worst of the cold weather. This diagram shows a DC 3-Rail Traction System with the location of the current rail in relation to the running rails. The third rail system uses a "shoe" to collect the current on the train, perhaps because it was first called a "slipper" by the pioneers of the industry (it slipped along the rail, OK?) but it was not very pretty to look at, so perhaps someone thought shoe was a better description. Whatever the origin, shoe has stuck to this day.
Modern shoe systems have remote lifting facilities. All shoes need some way of being moved clear of the current rail, usually for emergency purposes. The most common reason is when a shoe breaks off and its connecting lead to the electrical equipment on the train has to be secured safely. The other shoes on the same circuit must be isolated while this is done, unless the current is switched off from the whole section - perhaps disabling several other trains.

Isolation used to involve inserting a wooden "paddle" between the shoe and the current rail and then tying the shoe up with a strap or rope. More recently, mechanical or pneumatic systems have been devised to make it possible to lift shoes from inside the train remotely from the driving cab.

Most types of top contact shoes simply hang from a beam suspended between the axleboxes of the bogie. The suspension method was originally just a couple of slotted links to compensate for movement which allowed gravity to provide the necessary pressure. Later systems had radially mounted shoes to provide more stable contact through lever action. Top contact systems with protective covers over them, like the New York Subway (Figure 4), needed radially mounted shoes anyway to allow them to fit under the cover.
Side and bottom contact shoes are spring loaded to provide the necessary contact force. An example of a bottom contact shoe as used on the Dockland Light Railway line in London is shown in Figure 3 and in the video (Figure 5). Some top contact systems have also used spring loading but they are mechanically more difficult to control because of the hunting action of the bogie and the risk that the shoes will get trapped under the head of the rail and turn it over.

Gaps

You will often see trains with only one pantograph but, on trains which use shoes, there are always several shoes. The contact with the overhead wire is not normally broken but the third rail must be broken at junctions to allow for the continuity of running rails. These third rail breaks, or "gaps", as they are called, can lead to loss of power on the train. The power losses can be reduced by locating shoes along the train and connecting them together by a cable known as a busline. In spite of this, there can be problems. Woe betide the driver who stops his train with all the shoes "off juice" or "gapped". Yes, it happens more often than you think and yes, before you ask, it's happened to me. It is an embarrassing nuisance only solved by being pushed onto the third rail by another train or by obtaining special long leads with a plug at one end for the train and shoes at the other end for the third rail. Of course, it does cause a long delay.
At various points along the line, there will be places where trains can be temporarily isolated electrically from the supply system. At such places, like terminal stations, "section switches" are provided. When opened, they prevent part of the line for being fed by the substation. They are used when it is necessary to isolate a train with an electrical fault in its current collection system.

Although 3rd rail is considered a suburban or metro railway system, 750 volt DC third rail supply has been used extensively over southern England and trains using it run regularly up to 145 km/h. This is about its limit for speed and has only spread over such a large area for historical reasons.

Return

What about the electrical return?  There has to be a complete circuit, from the source of the energy out to the consuming item (light bulb, cooking stove or train) and back to the source, so a return conductor is needed for our railway. Simple – use the steel rails the wheels run on. Provided precautions are taken to prevent the voltage getting too high above the zero of the ground, it works very well and has done so for the last century. Of course, as many railways use the running rails for signalling circuits as well, special precautions have to be taken to protect them from interference.

The power circuit on the train is completed by connecting the return to brushes rubbing on the axle ends. The wheels, being steel, take it to the running rails. These are wired into the substation supplying the power and that does the job. The same technique is used for DC or AC overhead line supplies.

AC or DC traction

It doesn’t really matter whether you have AC or DC motors, nowadays either can work with an AC or DC supply. You just need to put the right sort of control system between the supply and the motor and it will work. However, the choice of AC or DC power transmission system along the line is important.  Generally, it’s a question of what sort of railway you have. It can be summarised simply as AC for long distance and DC for short distance. Of course there are exceptions and we will see some of them later.

It is easier to boost the voltage of AC than that of DC, so it is easier to send more power over transmission lines with AC.  This is why national electrical supplies are distributed at up to 765,000 volts AC . As AC is easier to transmit over long distances, it is an ideal medium for electric railways. Only the problems of converting it on the train to run DC motors restricted its widespread adoption until the 1960s.

DC, on the other hand was the preferred option for shorter lines, urban systems and tramways. However, it was also used on a number of main line railway systems, and still is in some parts of continental Europe, for example. Apart from only requiring a simple control system for the motors, the smaller size of urban operations meant that trains were usually lighter and needed less power. Of course, it needed a heavier transmission medium, a third rail or a thick wire, to carry the power and it lost a fair amount of voltage as the distance between supply connections increased. This was overcome by placing substations at close intervals – every three or four kilometres at first, nowadays two or three on a 750 volt system – compared with every 20 kilometres or so for a 25 kV AC line.

It should be mentioned at this point that corrosion is always a factor to be considered in electric supply systems, particularly DC systems. The tendency of return currents to wander away from the running rails into the ground can set up electrolysis with water pipes and similar metallics. This was well understood in the late 19th Century and was one of the reasons why London’s Underground railways adopted a fully insulated DC system with a separate negative return rail as well as a positive rail - the four-rail system. Nevertheless, some embarrassing incidents in Asia with disintegrating manhole covers near a metro line as recently as the early 1980s means that the problem still exists and isn’t always properly understood. Careful preparation of earthing protection in structures and tunnels is an essential part of the railway design process and is neglected at one’s peril.

Arquivo 004 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/electric-traction-power.html

Overhead Line (Catenary)

The mechanics of power supply wiring is not as simple as it looks (Figure 1). Hanging a wire over the track, providing it with current and running trains under it is not that easy if it is to do the job properly and last long enough to justify the expense of installing it. The wire must be able to carry the current (several thousand amps), remain in line with the route, withstand wind (in Hong Kong typhoon winds can reach 200 km/h), extreme cold and heat and other hostile weather conditions.

Overhead catenary systems, called "catenary" from the curve formed by the supporting cable, have a complex geometry, nowadays usually designed by computer. The contact wire has to be held in tension horizontally and pulled laterally to negotiate curves in the track. The contact wire tension will be in the region of 2 tonnes. The wire length is usually between 1000 and 1500 metres long, depending on the temperature ranges. The wire is zigzagged relative to the centre line of the track to even the wear on the train's pantograph as it runs underneath.

The contact wire is grooved to allow a clip to be fixed on the top side (Figure 8). The clip is used to attach the dropper wire.  The tension of the wire is maintained by weights suspended at each end of its length. Each length is overlapped by its neighbour to ensure a smooth passage for the "pan".  Incorrect tension, combined with the wrong speed of a train, will cause the pantograph head to start bouncing. An electric arc occurs with each bounce and a pan and wire will soon both become worn through under such conditions.
More than one pantograph on a train can cause a similar problem when the leading pantograph head sets up a wave in the wire and the rear head can’t stay in contact. High speeds worsen the problem. The French TGV (High Speed Train) formation has a power car at each end of the train but only runs with one pantograph raised under the high speed 25 kV AC lines. The rear car is supplied through a 25 kV cable running the length of the train. This would be prohibited in Britain due to the inflexible safety approach there.

A waving wire will cause another problem. It can cause the dropper wires, from which the contact wire is hung, to "kink" and form little loops. The contact wire then becomes too high and aggravates the poor contact.

AC Sections

Overhead lines are normally fed in sections like 3rd rail systems, but AC overhead sections are usually much longer. Each subsection is isolated from its neighbour by a section insulator in the overhead contact as shown in this picture below. The subsections can be joined through special high speed section switches. 

Catenary Suspension Systems

Various forms of catenary suspension are used (see diagram below), depending on the system, its age, its location and the speed of trains using it. Broadly speaking, the higher speeds, the more complex the "stitching", although a simple catenary will usually suffice if the support posts are close enough together on a high speed route. Modern installations often use the simple catenary, slightly sagged to provide a good contact. It has been found to perform well at speeds up to 125 m/hr (200 km/hr).

At the other end of the scale, a tram depot may have just a single wire hung directly from insulated supports. As a pantograph passes along it, the wire can be seen to rise and fall. This is all that is necessary in a slow speed depot environment. I haven’t yet mentioned trolley poles as a method of current collection. These were used for current collection on low speed overhead systems and were common on trams or streetcars but they are now obsolete.
DC overhead wires are usually thicker and, in extreme load cases, double wires are used, as in Hong Kong Mass Transit’s 1500 v DC supply system. Up to 3000 volts overhead is used by DC main line systems (e.g., parts of France, Belgium and Italy) but below 1500 volts, a third rail can be used. In operating terms, the third rail is awkward because of the greater risk of it being touched at ground level. It also means that, if trains are stopped and have to be evacuated, the current has to be turned off before passengers can be allowed to wander the track. Third rail routes need special protection to be completely safe. On the other hand, some people consider the overhead catenary system a visual intrusion. Singapore, for example, has banned its use outside of tunnels.


Booster Transformers

On lines equipped with AC overhead wires, special precautions are taken to reduce interference in communications cables. If a communications cable is laid alongside rails carrying the return current of the overhead line supply, it can have unequal voltages induced in it. Over long distances the unequal voltages can represent a safety hazard. To overcome this problem, many systems used booster transformers. These are positioned on masts at intervals along the route. They are connected to the feeder station by a return conductor cable hung from the masts so that it is roughly the same distance from the track as the overhead line. The return conductor is connected to the running rail at intervals to parallel the return cable and rails. The effect of this arrangement is to reduce the noise levels in the communications cable and ensure the voltages remain at a safe level.

Auto Transformers

A more efficient system of AC electrification is known as the auto transformer system. In effect, it is based on distributing power at 50 kV AC but feeding the power to the trains at 25 kV AC. To achieve this, the supply sub-station transformer is provided with a centre tap secondary winding at 50 kV (set to 55 kV for the maximum limit of contact wire voltage of 27.5 kV). The centre tap is solidly connected to ground so that one terminal is at +25 kV and another at -25 kV. The two supplies at a phase difference of 180 degrees. 

With this system, the contact wire is fed at +25 kV and the feeder wire at -25 kV thus the voltage in between these circuits is 50 kV but to ground is 25 kV. The insulation and clearances may still be designed for 25 kV AC only.

Arquivo 005 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/electric-traction-power.html

Pantographs

Current is collected from overhead lines by pantographs. Pantographs are easy in terms of isolation - you just lower the pan to lose the power supply to the vehicle. However, they do provide some complications in other ways.

Since the pantograph is usually the single point power contact for the locomotive or power car, it must maintain good contact under all running conditions. The higher the speed, the more difficult the maintenance of good contact. We have already mentioned the problem (above) of a wave being formed in the wire by a pantograph moving at high speed.

Pantograph contact is maintained either by spring or air pressure. Compressed air pressure is preferred for high speed operation. The pantograph is connected to a piston in a cylinder and air pressure in the cylinder maintains the pantograph in the raised condition.

Originally, pantographs were just that, a diamond-shaped "pantograph" with the contact head at the top. Two contact faces are normally provided. More modern systems use a single arm pantograph - really just half of the original shape - a neater looking design (photo above).

The contact strips of the pantograph are supported by a lightweight transverse frame which has "horns" at each end.   These are turned downwards to reduce the risk of the pantograph being hooked over the top of the contact wire as the train moves along. This is one of the most common causes of wires "being down". A train moving at speed with its pantograph hooked over the wire can bring down several kilometres of line before it is detected and the train stopped (Figure 14). The most sophisticated pantographs have horns which are designed to break off when struck hard, for example, by a dropper or catenary support arm.  These special horns have a small air pressure tube attached which, if the pressure is lost, will cause the pan to lower automatically and so reduce the possible wire damage.

Multi-Voltage

Some train services operate over lines using more than one type of current. In cities such  as London, New York City and Boston, the same trains run under overhead wires for part of the journey and use third rail for the remainder. In Europe, some locomotives are equipped to operate under four voltages - 25 kV AC, 15 kV AC, 3,000 V DC and 1,500 V DC. Modern electronics makes this possible with relative ease and cross voltage travel is now possible without changing locomotives.


Arquivo 006 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html

Stations are the places where trains stop to collect and deposit passengers.  Since the station is the first point of contact most passengers have with the railway, it should be regarded as the "shop window" for the services provided.  It should therefore be well designed, pleasing to the eye (Figure 1), comfortable and convenient for the passenger as well as efficient in layout and operation.  Stations must be properly managed and maintained and must be operated safely.

Airport, harbours and stations form interfaces within modes and between multiple modes, providing both intermodal and intramodal connectivity. However, a more in depth analysis reveals that such facilities have functions that go beyond their role of links in a transport chain. This page looks at some of the issues that arise from the need to satisfy a multitude of requirements, focusing on passenger transport. Parts of this page were adapted from an article by the author and F Schmid of the University of Birmingham. 
A Beacon for the Area

Railway stations in city environments, with other major structures in close proximity and often surrounded by large, visually and commercially attractive corporate buildings, have to stand out as beacons for the community and the city. They must be eye-catching, built to high standards and they must attract passengers to the railway. Good examples are Berlin Hauptbahnhof in Germany, Lille Europe in France, Liège-Guillemins in Belgium (Figure 1),  Bejing South Station in China and the Canary Wharf station of Crossrail and the renovated St. Pancras in London. However, while a station might have an important function as a beacon, it must still be designed to meet the needs of the railway, of the people using it and of the staff running it. 

A station is a transport hub, by definition. Even the most humble stop in a tramway network allows interchange between movement on foot and travel by tram. Railway stations thus represent focal points for journey mode changes, places that travellers require for business, commuting and leisure travel. They arrive on foot, by bicycle, car, taxi, bus, coach, tram and metro, and they carry luggage ranging from a small computer bag to a pair of cases each the size of steamer trunks, so they must be able to find the station easily and they must have good access to the facilities and the trains. The station must be designed to allow easy modal changes and to provide a simple approach from within the cityscape. 


Arquivo 007 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html

Circulation

One of the most important requirements of any station is that of accommodating circulation (Figure 2). This relates to movements of trains as well as those of passengers with their luggage and other people such as ‘weepers and greeters’. The station also must create a safe interface between the two types of traffic. It is essential that the people movement flows in a station are designed carefully, both during normal operation and during emergencies like security alerts and evacuation. Signage and sightlines form an important part of maintaining efficient flows for passengers, while effective railway control allows trains to arrive in and depart from stations with minimum delay.

Interchange Role

Intermodal changes also need careful evaluation, so that passengers arriving by road can access the station facilities easily and without obstructing waiting areas, or exits. Equally, ticket offices and machines need to be positioned and provided in sufficient numbers so that users can queue and access the facility without obstruction and without resulting in shuffling lines of stressed travellers blocking the station’s pedestrian and vehicle routes.

Mixing types of passengers can cause congestion and frustration. At St Pancras International station in London, arriving international train passengers merge into the local commuter crowds flowing towards the Underground station interchange. At peak times, this creates a mix of slow and fast moving pedestrians in a narrow space obstructed with pillars, lifts and greeters.

Private car access is often an issue at stations. Drivers meeting trains can cause congestion if a suitable short term parking area is not provided. People do not want to pay exorbitant parking charges just to meet relatives and friends who have chosen to come by train. Such charges can discourage train travel.

Passengers arrive and leave by train but almost universally, they change their mode of transportation at the station . It may be from train to train, or from train to any other movement mode, from foot to bus, taxi, car, bicycle or metro. The Kings Cross and St Pancras stations complex gives a good example of the variety of modal changes possible and the good and bad features of all of them. 

First, we should realise that the area covered by the combination of the stations of St. Pancras and Kings Cross is vast. It takes ten minutes to walk directly from one side to the other. Clearly thought out routes are essential for arriving and departing passengers. Secondly, the whole complex has been rebuilt and updated, as far as is possible within the considerable restrictions imposed by English Heritage, a body that has been described as a willful inhibitor of the modernisation of Britain’s infrastructure. The rebuilding is complete yet the Kings Cross side of the project suffers from poor interchange facilities because passengers gravitate towards the completed and improved St Pancras International station. So, what is wrong with the facilities provided?

Looking at facilities for cyclists first, these are provided but they are a long way from the station, sharing space with a car park north of the St Pancras station complex. The premises are secure but a casual user would be pushed to find the cycle storage area unless they had done their research first. 


Arquivo 008 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html

Car and taxi pick up and drop off points are provided, of course, but it is not always clear where taxis are supposed to stop and there are different locations around the complex. There’s nowhere for cars to wait to ease picking up duties. Confusingly, the Network Rail description of the available facilities does not align with what is on the ground. 

Buses have a total of nine different locations for access around King’s Cross and St. Pancras, scattered across the roads around the complex, some of which are best accessed by using the subways intended for users of the Underground station. The access route for the Underground is split, with two connections from the St Pancras side and one from Kings Cross.

Cost of Time

Passengers value time and the time they spend on different parts of a journey can be aggregated by calculating the ‘generalised cost’ of the journey, usually not in money terms but in total minutes – a reflection of the fact that people’s wallets may be unlimited but not their lifespans. Different parts of the journey are weighted according to how they are perceived by the passenger so that, for example, time spent on the train is weighted at one, while time spent waiting for a train is multiplied by a factor of two. In a station, the activity of changing between trains can have a generalised cost of up to 30 minutes, e.g., when people are forced to climb stairs. In reality, the time taken may be much shorter. It just depends on how efficient and convenient it is and how the situation is perceived by passengers.

Station Design

The design of stations has developed over the years as the use of railways has expanded.  A new form of station design has also evolved with the introduction of metros and high capacity urban railways.  A number of different types of station design are shown here and the advantages and disadvantages of each are discussed.

On a railway which requires passengers to be in possession of a valid ticket or "authority to travel" whilst on the property, the station area is divided into an "unpaid area" and a "paid area", to denote the parts where passengers should be in possession of a valid ticket.  Of course, there are now many railway operators who have "open stations", which allow passenger to wander at will without a ticket.  In these circumstances, in addition to a ticket office or ticket selling machines, tickets can be purchased on the train.


Arquivo 009 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html

In a traditional two-track side platforms station, each platform has a ticket office and other passenger facilities such as toilets and perhaps a refreshment or other concession.  Where there is a high frequency service or for designs with high platforms, the two platforms are usually connected by a footbridge.  In the case of a station where tickets are required to allow passengers to reach the platform, a "barrier" or, in the case of a metro with automatic fare collection, a "gate line", is provided to divide the "paid area" and "unpaid area".This design allows equal access for passengers approaching from either side of the station but it does require the provision of two ticket offices and therefore staffing for both of them.  Sometimes, stations with two ticket offices will man only one full time.  The other will be manned as required at peak times.
A cheaper form of station construction, at least for a railway at grade level, is the island platform (Figure 5).  As its name suggests, this is a single platform serving two tracks passing on either side, effectively creating an island which can only be accessed by crossing a track.  A bridge or underpass is usually provided.  Island platforms are usually wider than single platforms used for side platform stations but they still require less area.  In the example shown above, there are two ticket offices, but one can be provided if preferred.  Island platforms on elevated railways do require additional construction of the viaduct structure (usually adding considerably to the costs) to accommodate the curves in the tracks needed to separate them on the approach to the platform.

Elevated Stations

Elevated railways are still popular in cities, despite their history of noise creation and generally unfriendly environmental image.  The poor image has been considerably reduced with modern techniques of sound reduction and the use of reinforced and pre-stressed concrete structures.  They are considerably cheaper than underground railways (at least half the price, sometimes considerably less than that) and can be operated with reduced risk of safety and evacuation problems.  Modern elevated railways have been built in such cities as Dubai, Bangkok, Manila, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore. 


Arquivo 010 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Station and Crossing Safety

There are two differing views about passenger safety at stations which have dictated station design for the last 150 years or more.  For most of the world, it has been assumed that passengers (and other members of the public) will take care of their own safety when walking on or near a railway.  Because of this, it is not considered necessary to segregate passengers from trains.   Passengers will look out for passing trains when crossing tracks and will take care not to leave luggage, children, cars or anything else which could damage or be damaged by a train.  Station design has reflected this so that platforms were often not raised very much above rail level.  Passengers were forced to climb up to trains, usually with the help of a plentiful staff and portable steps carried on vehicles.  Passengers were free to wander across tracks, usually at walkways specially provided for them and any road vehicles which needed to cross the line.  Railways were not fenced.  Only at terminals and very busy stations was any attempt at segregation made.

In the UK, railways were always fenced and passengers and the public were invariably kept away from the tracks as far as possible.  Platforms were built to a level which allowed a reasonable step up into a train without help and bridges or underground passages (called "subways" in the UK) were provided to allow people to cross the line unhindered by the movement of trains.  The high platform also permitted quicker loading and inloading of trains.

In the US, the rise in the popularity and numbers of automobiles was matched by a decline in the use of railroads.  The decline in the use of railroads meant there was also a decline in the awareness of the public of the nature of railroads or of the power and speed of trains and the distances they required to stop.  The result has been an increase in the number of crossing accidents, where cars or trucks have been hit by trains.  There have also been incidents where passengers have been struck by passing trains while crossing the tracks to reach a station exit.

Platforms

The term platform is worth explaining.  In the US, the position of a train in a station is referred to as the "track", as in "The train for San Diego is on Track 9".   This is very logical as the raised portion of the ground next to the track is actually the platform and may well be used by passengers boarding a train on a track along the opposite edge of the platform.  For this reason, the British way of referring to the "Train at Platform 4", referring to the platform "face", sometimes confuses foreign visitors, who see two trains, one on each side of the platform.

It is a feature of station design in the UK and railways designed to UK standards, that platforms are built to the height of the train floor, or close to it.  This is now also adopted as standard on metro railways throughout the world.  The rest of the world has generally had a train/station interface designed on the basis that the passengers step up into the train from a low level platform or even straight off the ground.  To this end, passenger vehicles were usually designed with end entrances, having the floor narrower then the rest of the car body so that a set of steps could be fitted to either side of the entrance gangway.  However, high platforms are now seen in many countries around the world.

Platform width is also an important feature of station design.  The width must be sufficient to accommodate the largest numbers of passengers expected but must not be wasteful of space - always at a premium for station areas in expensive land districts of a city.  The platform should be designed to give free visual areas along its length so that passengers can read signs and staff can ensure safety when dispatching trains.  Columns supporting structures (photo) can often seriously affect the operation of a station by reducing circulating areas and passenger flows at busy times.  Platform edges should be straight to assist operations by allowing clear sight lines. 

Facilities at Stations

Passenger and other users’ facilities must be an integral part of station design, aligned with the size and importance of the hub as a whole. Apart from pedestrian routes designed to separate incoming and outgoing flows and areas for general circulation and waiting, there must be a structured approach to establishing the correct location of station facilities and the routes leading to these.. Aside from the ticketing facilities mentioned above, there is normally a need for information enquiry points, toilets and waiting rooms – or at least decently sheltered open areas – for departing passengers awaiting trains. Nowadays, in the UK, the tendency is to limit well provided waiting lounges to premium passengers paying first class fares, while other passengers are expected to remain in the general circulating areas or to use the coffee shops scattered around larger stations. 


Arquivo 011 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Entrances and Exits

Station entrances and exits must be designed to allow for the numbers of passengers passing through them, both under normal and emergency conditions.  Specific emergency exit requirements are outlined in many countries as part of safety legislation or to standards set down by the railways or other organisations.  The codes in NFPA 130 (the US standard for their transit industry) are one such instance.  These codes usually define the exit flows and the types of exits allowed for, e.g. the different rates for passages, stairways and escalators.

Whatever the codes define, the entrances to a station must be welcoming to the prospective passenger.  Stations must also have sufficient entrances to cater for the different sides of the railway route but the number must also take into account the cost effectiveness of each entrance.  The cost of staffing ticket offices can be very considerable and the numbers of ticket offices must be managed to suit the patronage offering.

Consideration must be paid to issues like which way doors open.  On the Paris Metro in 1918, a crown panicked near Bolivar station during an air raid on the city and 66 people were killed in a crush trying to get into the station for shelter.  The obstacle that triggered the crush was a set of doors that only opened outwards -- normally the right direction for safety, but not when the crowd is trying to rush in.  Subsequently it became Metro policy that all doors had to open both ways.

Passenger Information

Professional railway staff often refer to them as Train Describers.  Whatever it is called, there must be a reliable way of informing the passengers where the trains are going.  Passenger information systems are essential for any railway.  One of the most common complaints by passengers on railways is the lack of up to date and accurate information.  When asking the staff for information, passengers expect an accurate and courteous response with the latest data.  There is nothing worse than the "your guess is as good as mine" response when a member of staff is asked what is happening when a train is delayed or has not appeared on time.  This means that staff must have access to the latest information and they must be trained to use it properly and to pass it on to passengers.  



Arquivo 012 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Information displays mounted in public areas must be visible in all weather conditions (noting that some electronic displays are very difficult to see in sunlight conditions) and be updated regularly with accurate information.  There are two types of information - constant and instant.  Constant information can be described as that which describes the services and fares available and which changes only a few times a year or less.  This information can be displayed on posters and fixed notices.  There also might be special offers which can be posted from time to time.  Instant information is that which changes daily or minute by minute.  This is better displayed electronically or mechanically - both systems can be seen around the world. 

For instant systems, it can be assumed that railway passengers require to know:

The time now;
The destination and expected time of arrival of the next train;
The stations served by this train;
Major connections requiring boarding of this train;
The position of their coach - if travelling with a reserved place;
Where the train will stop - for variable length trains and
Other destinations served from this station and from which platform.
A good example of passenger information displays can be seen on some Paris (France) RER stations.  A large illuminated board is hung over the platform and all the stations served by the train approaching are shown by lamps lit next to the station name.  The time now and the train length is also shown. Although the system is not now modern, it is very effective.

There are some information systems appearing with advertising in some form or other.  This is a useful source of revenue or sponsorship but it must not be allowed to detract from the main aim of providing the passenger with train service information.

Some modernised lines are nowadays provided with bi-directional signalling.  This allows trains to travel along either line at normal speeds and be fully under the control of fixed signals.  This is a useful facility to have when engineering works have made one track unusable.  Trains operating in either direction will then use the other track(s).  For passenger information purposes, bi-directional signalling makes it necessary to have good and easily variable passenger information displays.

Smart Stations

WiFi facilities should be available on the station for passengers and staff. There are a wide range of systems and facilities that can be used to manage stations and their systems and to provide information to passengers and staff. Open access data is sometimes offered by operators that allow apps to be designed and distributed to allow public access to train information (Figure 9). These systems should be available to staff at all times. It does not look good for passengers to be better informed about the train service than the staff who are supposed to be controlling it.


Arquivo 013 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Toilets

For a long time the provision of toilets on railway premises has been the subject of criticism and debate, both in the industry and amongst passengers.  Passengers expect to be provided with facilities and complain loudly when they are not.  On the other hand, public toilets are regularly abused and vandalised in many countries and railway administrations end up paying large amounts to maintain and repair them.  They can also often be used for illegal activities, such as drug related offences, sexual activities and for robberies.  Some railways, especially those in big cities, have, for many years, tried to close most of station toilets because of the cost of keeping them in a reasonable condition and because of the difficulties in policing them. The result has been an increase in the number of passengers relieving themselves in the public and sometimes in the prohibited areas of the railway, including cases where they have wandered onto the track and got themselves killed by passing trains. At the very least, these activities cause an odour and health risk nuisance. 

Any railway operators responsible for stations will have to decide whether they are prepared to pay for the installation of toilets and, if they do so decide, they must be prepared for the management and maintenance of such facilities.  Nowadays, it is considered good marketing to provide good restroom, baby changing and toilet facilities.  They will not be cheap to provide and they will require regular inspections to ensure the safety and cleanliness of the premises.  In spite of all the difficulties, toilets must be considered a requirement, if for no other reason than the public expect them.  If they are installed, they must be designed to a high standard and then kept spotlessly clean throughout the day.

Retail Outlets

Concessions for retail outlets on railway premises can be a lucrative source of income for a railway and the opportunity to provide for them should be taken wherever possible.  The normal types of concessions are coffee shops, refreshment counters and small lunch rooms, plus pharmacies, dry cleaners, newspaper shops and flower shops.  Some larger stations are able to provide space for so many shops that they are almost shopping malls in their own right.  This is good for the railway, since it attracts customers and it provides a sense of community which would otherwise be lacking.  There should, however, be limits as to what can be done and proper design in the first place and subsequent good estate management are both required to permit railway operations to continue unhindered and with safety (Figure 10).

Shops should not be allowed to sell dangerous goods and may be restricted in the sale of tobacco products if the railway has a no smoking policy.  Some operators have excluded the sale of food within their property because they have a no eating/drinking policy.  Other railways regard food/beverage sales as an important part of the marketing strategy and positively encourage restaurants to take leases on stations.  Food outlets must not be allowed to generate a rubbish or vermin problem.

At least, operators must prevent shops from allowing passages to become obstructed with sales equipment and they must ensure that they conform to the railway's safety requirements in cooking and similar activities.  Leases for shops should detail all the exclusions required and lay out clearly the safety, evacuation and training requirements for concession staff.

Station owners and architects are always looking for ways to develop the commercial possibilities of the station and its environs. Good retail outlets of the right type can add a useful source of income for the station owners or operators and they help to provide a sense of community and interest within the station and its surroundings. They also provide an extra presence within the station that reduces the opportunities for crime and vandalism and instills in passengers a better sense of security.

Care must be taken to choose the right kinds of shops and to ensure that the sales and services are appropriate for the station context. Thus, on a railway that suffers from alcohol related excesses, it may not be sensible to allow alcohol to be sold and it might be unwise, from a security standpoint, to accept a lease offer from a retailer selling military memorabilia in a gift shop. Fast food shops may also not be desirable because they create the potential for vast quantities of litter. 

The usual outlets seen on stations are cafes, sandwich shops, newspaper stalls, bookshops, florists and gift shops. Dry cleaners and shoe repairers are also popular. Larger stations often have room for fashion outlets. In almost all cases, it is important that the shop fronts are obvious to customers but, at the same time, they must not restrict walkways through the station or obstruct exits, escalators and lifts. Leases must also include a requirement for retailers to meet the railway’s fire and safety protection requirements and that staff are properly trained for alarms, evacuation and emergencies. It is essential that station managers regularly inspect retail premises to ensure that they comply with their lease obligations.

The location of retail premises and their proportion in relation to the station size and shape must be designed in at the very earliest stages of the station planning process. They must not be allowed to fill space that is needed for passenger movement or waiting. For many years, Waterloo Station in London had some large retail units spread along the main concourse area. These provided a very good utility for the shoppers but they prevented passengers from moving around freely, obstructed the view of the large train describer systems and caused serious overcrowding problems whenever services were disrupted. As a consequence of ever increasing passenger numbers, the retail units had to be removed to recreate the necessary circulating space. Happily, the visual impact and station sightlines of the whole concourse area have been hugely improved as a result.


Arquivo 014 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Lifts and Escalators

Vertical transportation at stations in city environments and on urban railways is almost as important as the horizontal transportation provided by the trains.  Any station not easily accessible on the surface and which requires stairs, will nowadays, require lifts for the disabled.  Stations with a height difference between levels of more than 4 to 5 metres (13-18 feet) will probably need escalators as well - certainly in the up direction.  Escalators (Figure 11) are essential in areas of stations where large volumes of passengers need to change levels and their location and orientation must be carefully thought through. Escalators are expensive, so the number of passengers using the facility must be at a sufficient level to make them worthwhile.  Both lifts and escalators are high cost maintenance items and need to be kept in good condition.  They require mandatory regular safety inspections.

The siting of lifts and escalators is important.  Passengers have to queue to board them so there must be space at the boarding point to accommodate a large number of people at busy times.  Such areas must be kept free of obstructions and not be too close to platform edges.  The number of stairways and escalators must be sufficient to allow a trainload of alighting passengers to clear a platform before the next trainload arrives.  This may seem obvious, but it isn't always done.  Most countries require an evacuation standard to be applied to the number and location of stairs and escalators.  This enables the station to be cleared safely in the minimum time.

One other point to note.  Escalators in the railway environment usually get a lot more use than those you see in department stores.  A railway which buys a standard department store design escalator may find it will quickly wear out and will need constant repairs.  A more robust design may be a better life cycle cost solution.

Communications

We must not forget that a large station involves a wide and complex communications network, including telephone, radio, CCTV, public address, train arrival and departure displays, news media, WiFi and both fixed and variable direction signs. In performance terms, reliable communications are an essential feature of a station, under both normal and emergency conditions (Figure 5). Large steel structures, such as station roofs can form a considerable obstruction to a communications network if the propagation of electromagnetic waves has not been allowed for in the design. The use of specialist communications systems by emergency services must also be addressed in the design of the facilities. Power supplies for all these systems must be secure and reliable. 

Maintenance

Maintenance of both the fabric and equipment of the station must not be neglected at the design stage. Apart from the usual requirements for waste disposal and the provision of robust surfaces that make for easy cleaning, pity such visitors as the window cleaner, who may be required to reach large and very tall structures. Safe access for cleaning and glazing replacement must be built into the design. Remember too, that escalators and lifts may have to be withdrawn from service for maintenance or renewal, so additional facilities must be available under these conditions.


Arquivo 015 - http://www.railway-technical.com/infrastructure/stations.html 

Operations

We should not forget that a station has to have trains in it. Careful planning is essential to get the right layout to accommodate the type and volume of trains expected. With a design life of at least 60 years, the layout must be flexible and must allow for future expansion. The folly of providing only four platforms for the Midland Main Line at St Pancras is already apparent and the restriction on the capacity here will become worse when the line is eventually electrified throughout.

The type of service provided will affect capacity at stations. At a through station with a mix of local and commuter services, combined with long distance trains, the layout of the station needs to combine efficient train movements and the shortest unconstrained passenger flows possible through the facilities and to and from the modal change areas.

At a terminus, turnround time is important. For commuter type trains, it is reasonable to expect a train to be ‘turned round’ or reversed in 10 minutes but this time will double for a long distance train needing re-supplying with food, drink, water and toiletries. Remember too, the time taken for each train to clear the platform and access route plus the time for the next train to occupy the platform must be allowed for.

Faregates

Many stations now incorporate gated barriers, dividing the station into ‘paid’ and ‘unpaid’ areas. The whole question of gates is emotionally charged: passengers who pay their fare regard barriers as an obstruction and an unwritten accusation that they cannot be trusted. Less frequent travellers see them as difficult and many do not understand how to use them. Gate design in general leaves much to be desired, with sluggish operation, unreliable performance, non-universal ticket recognition and too few units to cope with peak hour traffic. Railway operators regard them as hugely beneficial, since it has been shown that, after they have been installed, fraud is reduced and income increased, with additional benefits experienced in terms of station security. More needs to be done to encourage acceptance by users. 

Do not forget the staff

A station forming a part of a city hub is a major employer and most major stations are open 24 hours a day. As a rule, each job that must be staffed 24 hours requires the employment of five persons. Some jobs will involve temporary or part time attendance at the station and staff movements and changes will be frequent. There will be permanently employed staff for the station operation and, probably, contract staff for maintenance and cleaning, personnel of the operating companies, retail staff and separate units for policing and security and they all have different needs in terms of the station environment. Emergency services must also be considered when designing access to the site and any special facilities provided for them. 

Train crews, for example, will require accommodation at large stations, some being permanently based there but some requiring only facilities for personal needs breaks or as waiting areas. Their facilities should be as close to platforms as possible to remove excessive walking time from their duty periods.

Managing and providing facilities for the large permanent and transient staff population forms an essential part of a station’s operation. The station will need full and complete facilities for them, including control rooms, rest areas, offices, bathrooms, storage, training equipment and conference rooms. All these facilities must designed to be secure and easily inspected, if the station is to work effectively and safety.

A brief summary

For a station to function as part of a significant city hub, good architecture and design are essential but the choice of structure and facilities must be founded on the underlying principles of how passengers, staff and third parties behave. Providing simple free-flowing circulatory areas is a key element in assuring the main function of a station: boarding, alighting and transferring within and between nodes. Today, these basic principles are becoming ever more important as the sheer volume of users is threatening the performance of many British stations.


Arquivo 016 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

As	any	train	driver	will	attest,	driving	a	train	is	easy.		The	difficult	bit	is	stopping	it.		It’s easy	to	get	the	train	going	but	much	more	difficult	to	stop	in	the	right	place	and,	to	do	 this	consistently	and	keep	time,	requires	skill	and	concentration.		The	reason	for	this	is	 simple	– the	adhesion	available	for	a train	with	a	steel	wheel	on	a	steel	rail	is	such	that	 the	braking	distance	is	considerably	more	than	that	obtained	in	a	car	with	rubber	tyres	 on	the	average	road.	The	adhesion	between	a	tyre	and	the	road	surface	can	be	measured	 at	over	85%.		The	UK	main	line	railways	calculate	their	braking	distances	on	the	basis	of	 8%	adhesion,	an	order	of	magnitude	less.	This	sort	of	calculation	is	standard	across	the	 world. 
To	use	a	comparison	between	road	and	rail	braking,	we	can	look	at	someone	who	wants	to	 stop	 a	 car	from 70mph.	 	 The	 driver	 thinks	 about	 it	 (20m)	 and	 then	 brakes	 (80m),	 requiring	a	 total	of	100m	stopping	distance.		Now	 transfer	 this	process	 to	 the	cab	of	a	 train	running	at	70	mph.		The	driver	reaction	distance	is	still	20m but	you	have	to	add	 tome	for	applying	 the	brake	and	allowing	 for	it	 to	 feed	up	 to	 the	required	pressure	on	 the	whole	train,	which needs	another	60m.	Then the	actual	distance	for	the	train	to	stop	 will	be	another	950m	approx.,	giving	a total	of	1030m,	or	more	than	a	kilometre.		This	 would	represent	a	full	service	brake	application	with	no	allowances	for	error	or	a	safety	 margin.		An	emergency	brake	application	at	this	speed	might	get	the	train	to	a	stand	in	 700m	 if	 it’s	 not	 raining.	 	 This	 means	 that	 a	 train’s	 braking	 distance	 is	 likely	 to	 be	 an	 order	of	magnitude	greater	than	that	of	a	road	vehicle	and,	for	a	driver	in	an	emergency	 situation,	it	seems	like	a	million	times	greater	when	you	are	at	the	front	of	a	train	with	 the	emergency	brake	 fully	applied	and	 you	know	 there	is	nothing you	can	do	 to	avoid	 hitting	something	in	front	of	you 
It	is	a	sad	fact	of	life	that	very	few	members	of	the	general	public	understand	that	there	 is	 any	 difference	 between	 train	 braking	 and	 car	 braking,	 which	 is	 why	 a	 distraught	mother	once called	a	 train driver	in	 the	UK	a	“murderer”	when	his	 train	killed	her	16-year	old	son	who	was	 trespassing	on	 the	railway	with	his	 friends.		She	 thought	he	had	not	bothered	to	try	and	stop.		Of	course,	this	wasn’t	the	case	but	the	local	press	made	a	big	issue	of	it.		In another	instance,	there	were	calls	by	some	individuals	for	the	railways	to	 be	 closed	 down	 altogether	 after	 the	 Ufton	 Nervet	 level	 crossing	 accident	 on	 6	November	2004,	“because	trains	aren’t	safe	if	they	can’t	stop	for	a	car	at	a	level	crossing”.		Such	 uninformed	 nonsense	 is	 widespread	 in	 the	 public	 mind	 and	 the	 media	 love	 it.		Railway	companies	ignore	it	at	their	peril.		Urban	railway	administrations in	particular,must	 understand	 that	 a	 strong	 and	 carefully	 targeted	 public	 awareness	 campaign	 is	essential for	new	railways	and	tramways	if	a	low	accident	rate	is	to	be	achieved.


Arquivo 017 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

The long braking distances required by trains present a problem for the driver of a manually controlled train. He is unlikely to be able to see an obstruction or diversion requiring him to reduce the train speed or to stop. In effect, he is effectively driving “blind”. To overcome this, he (or she) requires advice in advance of the point where it is necessary to apply the brake. Railways have developed such a system, which we call signalling.
Traditionally, signals are provided at fixed lineside locations to indicate to the driver of an approaching train how he should proceed or, possibly, the limit of his movement authority (LMA). To achieve this, the line is divided into sections, often called blocks, and a signal is placed at the entrance to each block to act as a sort of “gate keeper”. The rule is that (normally) only one train is allowed into a block at any one time.
It is the practice on many railways to provide overrun space beyond the signal in the form of a margin, often referred to as an overlap. This overlap can be a set distance (183m on UK main line railways), calculated on a site-by-site basis, (London Underground) or by separating trains by a whole block length. The choice depends on the administration, traffic requirements and the type of signalling installed. Metro systems normally require signalling to include calculated overlaps or fixed block safety margins. Similar principles are being applied to main line railways as they are modernised. 
There is a wide variety of fixed signals used by railways around the world. They may be categorised into two broad groups, “speed signalling” or “route signalling”. Speed signalling is the most common, where the indications for the driver represent an instruction to proceed at a speed depending on the type of train in his charge. Most administrations in continental Europe and North America have adopted this system. A driver is shown one or more lights in a specified pattern, which gives him the authority to proceed (or not) at the speed designated to his train. Thus it is common for the same indication to allow a passenger train to proceed at, say, 160km/h, while a freight train is restricted to 60km/h on the same route. Some systems use variable number displays to indicate maximum speed. 
The route signalling system differs in that the speed limits are separate from the signalling. They are usually indicated by discrete and fixed lineside signs. Variations for different types of trains are assumed to be part of the driver’s knowledge. Drivers are shown proceed indications for a block or a number of blocks ahead. If a diverging route is set, additional indications are provided and the driver is expected to adjust the train speed to comply with the separate lineside signs. This system is normal UK practice and has been adopted in many overseas countries where UK railway systems have been installed. 
Some administrations use a combination of the two systems, the French railway SNCF, for example. Regardless of the system adopted, with manual driving, signal sighting will dictate the braking distances and therefore the block lengths. As train speeds increase, they require longer braking distances and therefore longer sighting distances or earlier warnings of conditions ahead. Very early on in the development of railways, routes were equipped with intermediate updates of signal information. 


Arquivo 018 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

the Signalling	Developments. The first development was to provide advance warning of a signal’s position or aspect2 by the use of a “distant” signal. It provided an indication showing the condition of the next signal ahead, i.e. whether this signal showed “stop” or “proceed”
The introduction of the distant signal provided an earlier sighting point and thus increased the available braking distance, allowing higher train speeds. With the introduction of warnings, it  became necessary to differentiate between the indications offered to drivers and yellow became the distant signal colour while red and green became “stop” and “proceed”. 
Another development was the “track circuit”. Originally signals were operated manually from “signal boxes” provided for each block, with trains being passed from block to block but, towards the end of the 19th Century, automatically operated signals appeared. Their operation depends on the replacement of the visual train detection system by an automatic system using an electrically operated track circuit. In its most basic form, each block has a low voltage circuit passing through the running rails. This is connected into a relay, which registers the status of the circuit. The relay is used to change the aspects showing on the signal protecting the section. It is designed as a “vital” or “fail safe system”. Track circuits of various types are widely used, including variable frequency circuits that remove the need for mechanically insulated rail joints to separate block circuits. In some installations, axle counters are used to perform the same function. 


Arquivo 019 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

the Multi-Aspect	Signalling. The division a line into blocks or sections presents a restriction on the capacity of the railway. The degree of the restriction becomes dependent on the length of the blocks. Indeed, the ultimate restriction will be the length of the longest block. On routes where traffic developed to a level where more and more trains were required, block length became critical. Capacity could only be increased by reducing block length. However, shorter blocks will not allow the operation of higher speed trains unless the signalling is arranged to provide warning of the state of several blocks ahead. From this requirement, multi-aspect signalling was born. The purpose of multi-aspect signalling is to allow a mix of trains to operate at high frequency and varying speeds of the same track. There are various forms of this type of signalling. 
In the UK, a 4-aspect signalling system is common and allows trains to operate at speeds of up to 200km/h. Blocks are normally about 1100m in length. A green aspect allows full speed running, indicating at least three blocks ahead are clear. A double yellow aspect shows two clear blocks ahead, while one yellow indicates one clear block ahead. A similar 3-aspect system, with slower speeds or longer blocks, is also common, using red, yellow and green aspects. Other railways use similar systems, including sequences of flashing lights and multiple lights to indicate the number of blocks free or the required speed limit. 
The Routing	Systems. Turnouts are provided where tracks are divided or joined. In order to prevent the possibility of derailments, it is a requirement that, when selected, turnouts are mechanically secured and  electrically monitored whilst trains are approaching and traversing the route. This process, known as interlocking, is also used to prevent any conflicting routes or movements being set up. Routes are protected by signals which cannot show a proceed aspect unless the route over which they can admit trains is set, locked and proved locked. An interlocking can be controlled by a manned, local signal cabin, a remote control room or through an automated computer control programme supervised from the control room. 
It is normal to provide the interlocking equipment and its safety systems local to the turnouts it controls. This was originally necessary because of the physical limitations of the mechanical locking systems and control rodding but now it is done to reduce the hard wiring usually mandated for such systems. Remote control need not be vital but the local interlocking system must be. 
Signals in route-based systems provide drivers with visual indications showing the route set up. This assumes that information about the speed limits on diverging routes (if any) is provided separately, usually by a fixed sign at the track side. Speed-based systems do not necessarily provide route indications. 


Arquivo 020 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

the Junction	Operation. The operation of frequent services through a junction (Figure 6) requires careful timetabling and accurate timekeeping if the planned throughput is not to be compromised. Each route has to be set and locked before the train approaches the sighting distance of the signal protecting the route, otherwise the driver will have to apply the brakes in case he is required to stop at the junction signal. For a train approaching at 160km/h, the route must be set and locked 82s before arrival. All conflicting moves will be prevented during this time. To this, the time for the train to clear the route must be added – about 10s. Assuming an opposing train movement is required through the junction after the first train in our example has passed, a second train on the same route can only pass through the junction 4.5 minutes later. 
For urban railways, grade separation of junctions must be the preferred option. This allows unobstructed throughput for converging routes and prevents delays in one direction affecting service in the other direction. Grade separation requires additional construction and land take but it is essential for the efficient operation of a high frequency metro service. It is invariably money well spent. 
The Enforcement. From the earliest days of railway operation, mistakes by drivers led to trains passing signals at danger, nowadays known in the UK as SPADs . Some of these incidents resulted in serious accidents involving the death of staff and passengers. Huge publicity is always given to train accidents and there was always (and still is) constant pressure on railway administrations to provide improved safety. Various schemes to provide some form of enforcement of signal stops were devised, some more successful than others. Some main line railways use awarning system in the cab to advise drivers of an adverse signal aspect. This requires the driver to acknowledge the alarm to prevent a brake application. 

Arquivo 021 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf

The UK uses the Train Protection and Warning System or TPWS. The idea behind TPWS is that, if a train approaches a stop signal showing a danger aspect at too high a speed to enable it to stop at the signal, it will be forced to stop, regardless of any action (or inaction) by the driver 
For each signal equipped with TPWS, two pairs of electronic loops are placed between the rails, one pair at the signal itself, the other pair some 200 to 450 metres on the approach side of the signal. Each pair consists of, first an arming loop and secondly, a trigger loop. The loops are activated if the signal is showing a stop aspect  
The pair of approach loops first met by the train at 400 to 200 metres before the signal, are set between 4 and 36 metres apart. When the train passes over the arming loop, an on-board timer is switched on to detect the elapsed time while the train passes the distance between the arming loop and the trigger loop. This time period provides a speed test. If the test indicates the train is travelling too fast, a full brake application will be initiated. In case the train passes the speed test successfully at the first pair of loops but then fails to stop at the signal, the second set of loops at the signal will cause a brake application. In this case, both loops are together (Figure 9) so that, if a train passes over them, the time elapsed will be so short that the brake application will be initiated at any speed. 
London Underground and some other metro systems use a mechanical trainstop device at all stop signals. These cause an emergency brake application on any train passing the signal at danger. This is a successful system but it represents a significant maintenance burden and it is not suitable for train speeds much over 100km/h. 
In the last 60 years or so, beginning in the US, some main line railways provided cab signalling indications and these have been coupled to enforcement systems on the train. During the same period, metros have adopted various forms of automated enforcement of signal aspects coupled with automatic driving of trains. These systems have become known as Automatic Train Control (ATC) and they incorporate enforcement, known as Automatic Train Protection (ATP), and automated driving, known as Automatic Train Operation (ATO). They will be described in a future paper. 


Arquivo 022 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

Railway signalling is the basic safety system controlling the movements of trains. It is the safety critical part of the train control function of the railway. Once instructed by a signaller or an automatic system, it is responsible for setting up non-conflicting and safe routes for trains, for defining (safe) limits of movement and for transmitting instructions or commands to train drivers.

There are two principal parts to a train protection system, train detection (knowing where the train is) and movement authority (telling the train how far it can go). The train protection system uses these two parts to safeguard a train's operation.
Background

Traditionally, signalling systems in Britain and in many other countries have relied on the train drivers reacting to indications displayed to them by line-side semaphore or colour light signals and controlling the train’s speed in line with the instructions. During the 150 years of the use of railway signalling, drivers’ failures to respond to commands transmitted by signal aspects of any type can and have led to a number of accidents, some causing very large numbers of fatalities. In response to the continuing need to reduce risks created by train drivers failing to respond to signal instructions, various forms of driver warning devices and signal command enforcement systems have been developed. These have become known as Train Protection Systems. Those systems that continuously monitor actual train speed and enforce adherence to a commanded speed pattern are referred to as Automatic Train Protection (ATP) systems.
Types of Train Protection Systems

All types of train protection systems are based on the desire to reduce or eliminate the possibility of driver error resulting in a train movement related accident by failing to obey a visually displayed line-side or in-cab signal instruction. The development of train protection on main line railways began with the introduction of warning systems and subsequently progressed to enforcement of the instructions issued by these systems.
Originally, the warning systems alerted the driver that he or she was approaching an adverse or restrictive line-side signal aspect and required him or her to acknowledge the warning. Otherwise the systems would initiate a brake application after a short delay. Later developments by national railway administrations included various levels of speed limitation and enforcement. Also, some systems were expanded to cater for speed limits for permanent or temporary speed restrictions. Technologies adopted for such warning and train stop systems include combinations of permanent magnets and electromagnets, inductive polarity-changing responders, coded beacons and simply coded track circuits.
More recently, fully Automatic Train Protection (ATP) systems have been developed to enforce speed limits and movement authorities at the full range of restrictive signals, with and without line-side signals and including permanent and temporary line speed limits. Driving is still manual but speed limits are always enforced. Degraded modes though invariably include low speed driving on sight.


Arquivo 023 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Two-Channel Safety Systems. Many older train protection systems are designed to rely on the statistical nature of driver and equipment failure. By designing the systems appropriately, it may safely be assumed that driver error and equipment failure will not occur simultaneously. A key characteristic of such systems is that the driver does not receive an indication of whether the train protection system is operating or not and is therefore encouraged to drive taking full responsibility for the movement of the train. The technical subsystem will only intervene if the driver attempts to pass a signal or to drive too fast. TPWS, train stop and Indusi are typical examples of this type of arrangement.

The Automatic Train Protection Systems. There are broadly two implementations of ATP systems – intermittent and continuous. Intermittent systems use electronic beacons (inductive or radio frequency) or short electrical loops positioned within the four-foot. These types of short-range devices are often referred to as "balises" (from the French word for ‘marker’). See Beacon Transmission for more information.  The continuous systems use a permanently active data transmission and monitoring system, either through electrical inductive coupling by means of track loops or coded track circuits or by means of radio transmission of limit of movement authorities.
Fully operational ATP systems were first introduced on metros in the late 1960s and are now common on such systems all over the world. Most metro applications use continuous systems in conjunction with automatic train operation. ATP was also introduced to the Japanese Shinkansen high speed route in 1964 and has since been introduced in various forms on a number of main line railways, often in conjunction with high speed train operation.
Principles

The basic defining principle of ATP is that train speed is monitored against the current permitted speed limit. The speed may be limited by line profile or signal indication, that is, the need to protect routes of other trains and track related constraints. If the allowable speed is exceeded, a brake application is invoked until the speed is brought within the required limit or the train is stopped.

Most ATP systems are based on conventional block signalling although these can be very short. Each block is described by a fixed dataset related to its location, length, gradient(s) and maximum (civil) speed limit(s). Each block will also have a variable data set derived from the signal aspects ahead and their effect on the resulting speed limit(s) for that block and the next block(s).

The Types of Balise. Passive Balise: Track based transponder that is ‘woken up’ by a low frequency signal and receives its energy from a passing train and then sends packets of information to the train.  Active Balise: Track based transponder that is powered from the signalling supply and that continuously sends packets of information to passing trains. Passive and active balises can transmit either fixed or variable information or both. Many railways prefer to use balises powered-up by the passing trains. Simple location information is almost invariably transmitted by means of passive balises.



Arquivo 024 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Enforcement. The speed limit on the approach to a restrictive signal forms a gradually reducing curve that follows the braking profile required to reach the target speed at the signal. If the signal shows a stop aspect, the target speed will be zero. The on-board monitoring equipment will continuously compare the train speed with the curve required to achieve the target speed and will initiate a warning – usually both audio and visual. If action is not taken, the system will cause a brake application.
In some implementations, a braking curve infringement calls for a full service brake initiation, in others for emergency brake. There are also differences in the brake release function. Some systems allow the driver to release the brake once the train speed has returned within the prescribed curve. In others, the brake command is irrevocable and the train must be brought to a stand before the driver can release the brake. There are also railway undertaking specific rules about the consequences when the ATP system has intervened.
The Train Data. On the train, data comprising train weight, length, braking capability and maximum technically permitted speed are necessary to ensure compliance with speed limits set by the ATP system. Usually, the train consist data must be input by the driver before the trains starts its journey. Ways of validating this may be considered necessary.

The Monitoring. In most cases, the performance of the equipment is monitored and recorded for further analysis in case of infringements or failures of the system. These systems are variously known as On Train Monitoring Systems (OTMS), On Train Data Recorders (OTDRs) or On Train Monitoring Recorders (OTMRs). They are the equivalent of the aircraft industry’s ‘black box’.
Drawbacks of Intermittent Systems

Continuous ATP systems allow constant data updates to be transmitted to trains so that the train driver can respond to changes in signal aspects as soon as they occur. Intermittent systems can only transmit changes in signal aspects when the train passes over a beacon or loop. This can restrict line capacity if a driver is unable to respond to a signal clearance, even though he or she can see the change of aspect, until the train’s on-board ATP computer has received a message from the balise located at the relevant signal.

In order to overcome this problem, infill loops or balises are provided at some signals (e.g., in 65% of the locations on the UK GWML system) to provide drivers with an update of a signal aspect and to allow brake release if a less restrictive aspect is shown.



Arquivo 025 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Automatic Warning System (AWS). Following a Signal Passed at Danger (SPAD) accident in poor visibility at Harrow and Wealdstone in 1952 when 112 persons were killed, British Railways decided to deploy their Automatic Warning System (AWS) over the whole network to provide train drivers with an in-cab warning of the indication of the next signal (Figure 2). This was a non-contact version of a system originally used on the Great Western Railway. Following a long development and approval programme, widespread installation started in 1956. This system is still in use today.
The system took the form of a track mounted, non-contact inductor, which became known as the AWS “ amp", placed about 185 metres (200 yards) on the approach side of the signal.

The AWS ramp is placed between the rails so that a detector on the train will pass over it and receive a signal.  The ramp will thus warn the driver of the status of the signal.  The French railways use a similar system called "the Crocodile", the Germans, the "Indusi".
The AWS ramp contains a pair of magnets, the first permanent, the second an electro-magnet linked to the signal to provide an indication of the aspect.  The ramp is placed between the rails so that a detector on the train can receive the indication data.  The more observant passenger on a station platform can often see the ramps between the rails.  They are usually a dirty yellow.

In operation, the train first passes over the permanent magnet and the on-board receiver sets up a trigger for a brake application.  Next it passes over the electro-magnet.  If the signal is green the electro-magnet is energised, the brake trigger is disarmed, a chime or bell rings in the driver’s cab and a black indicator disc is displayed. The driver takes no action.  If the signal is yellow or red, as shown in Figure 2, the electro-magnet is de-energised, so a siren sounds in the cab and the disc becomes black and yellow.  The driver must "cancel" the warning, otherwise the automatic application of the train brakes is triggered. 

The use of AWS was extended to protect certain permanent speed restrictions after an accident at Morpeth in 1969, which was caused by a driver failing to reduce the train speed for a speed restriction. AWS was installed at speed restriction locations where the train approach speed is over 60 mph or the reduction in speed required is more than one third of the approach speed. This is mandated in a railway group standard.

After an accident at Nuneaton in 1975, the use of AWS was extended further to include temporary speed restrictions. It is now also used for emergency speed restrictions.

Although AWS has been partially effective in reducing train movement accidents, it has not eliminated SPAD or over-speed errors entirely. By design, it is only intended to provide an alert and a reminder of a restrictive signal aspect or speed restriction. As long as the alert is acknowledged, the driver may continue to drive the train at any speed. A number of accidents occurred where drivers forgot the restrictive aspect warning – despite the visual reminder in the shape of the so-called ‘sunflower’ device.

AWS may be considered to a limited extent as a fail-to-safety system since the main trigger element is a permanent magnet. Failure of the electro magnet results in a warning indication to the driver. However, removal of the permanent magnet from the track is not detected.



Arquivo 026 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Driver’s Reminder Appliance (DRA). The Driver’s Reminder Appliance (DRA) was introduced from 1998 to assist with the prevention of SPADs, particularly at station starting signals. It is not really a train protection device in the narrow sense of the terminology. The DRA device consists of a push button in the driver’s cab. The driver is required to operate this whenever the train is detained at a red signal. The button disables traction and prevents the driver from restarting the train until he has reset the button. The primary purpose is to prevent trains starting against a red signal when inadvertently given the "right away" by a conductor or station staff. The effectiveness of this system is a matter of debate because its operation may become ‘automated’ as part of the train starting sequence.

The Train Protection and Warning System (TPWS). To overcome the limitations of AWS, an enforcement system was developed for the British railway system, known as TPWS (Train Protection and Warning System). This is designed to enforce observance of restricted speed requirements and signal stops by imposing a full brake application when over-speed is detected or when a train is being driven past a stop signal. TPWS was first tried on a section of the Thameslink route in 1996 and was then installed across most of the UK network between March 2000 and December 2003.
The idea behind TPWS is that, if a train approaches a stop signal showing a danger aspect at too high a speed to enable it to stop at the signal, it will be forced to stop, regardless of any action (or inaction) by the driver. The equipment is arranged as shown in Figure 4.

For each signal equipped with TPWS, two pairs of electronic loops are placed between the rails, one pair at the signal itself, the other pair some 200 to 450 metres on the approach side of the signal. Each pair consists of, first an arming loop and secondly, a trigger loop. The loops are activated if the signal is showing a stop aspect. 

The pair of approach loops first met by the train at 400 to 200 metres before the signal, are set between 4 and 36 metres apart. When the train passes over the arming loop, an on-board timer is switched on to detect the elapsed time while the train passes the distance between the arming loop and the trigger loop. This time period provides a speed test. If the test indicates the train is travelling too fast, a full brake application will be initiated. In case the train passes the speed test successfully at the first pair of loops but then fails to stop at the signal, the second set of loops at the signal will cause a brake application.  In this case, both loops are together so that, if a train passes over them, the time elapsed will be so short that the brake application will be initiated at any speed.


Arquivo 027 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

What TPWS Does. TPWS has certain features which allow it to provide an additional level of safety over the existing AWS system but it has certain limitations and does not provide the absolute safety of a full Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system.  What TPWS does is reduce the speed at which a train approaches a stop signal if the driver fails to get the speed of the train under control to allow him to stop at the signal.  If the approach speed is too fast, TPWS will apply a full brake but the train may still overrun the signal.  Fortunately, since the train is already braking and there is usually a "cushion" of  200 yards (183 metres) between the signal and the block it is protecting, there will be a much reduced risk of damage (human and propertywise) if the train hits anything.  With a possible total distance of 2000 feet (about 600 m) between the brake initiation and the block entrance, trains "hitting" the first loops at up to 120 km/h (75mph) could be stopped safely. 
TPWS is also provided at many Permanent Speed Restrictions (PSRs) to ensure that a train does not pass through a restricted section of line (say one with a sharp curve) at too high a speed. However, there have been a number of issues related to the use of TPWS in these cases. Drivers have complainted that, although they were approaching the PSR at a speed which would allow the train to run at the correct speed within the restriction, they still got stopped by the TPWS "speed trap". This has led to some vigorus discussions between Network Rail, the train operating companies and the HSE. An add-on to TPWS, called TPWS+ is provided at certain signals where train speeds are above 100 mph or 160km/h.

TPWS does not replace the existing AWS system. AWS is retained, so the driver will still get the warnings advising him of adverse signals. The TPWS equipment is designed to interface with the existing on-board wiring of trains so that it can be fitted quickly.In an attempt to reduce the SPAD risks at certain high-speed locations, an add-on to TPWS, called TPWS+ is provided at certain signals where train speeds are above 100 mph. An additional loop pair is set about 770m in rear of the signal in order to provide the braking distance for a train "tripped" at 100 mph. Therefore, in these locations the signal approach has two speed traps. There are about 500 sites chosen on a risk assessment basis.

A further variation of TPWS, designed to be compliant with European requirements (q.v. below) and known as TPWS-E, was tried on a section of the British Great Western Main Line (GWML) but it was not proceeded with further in order to allow rapid deployment of the already approved TPWS equipment.

TPWS is also provided at many (about 3000) Permanent Speed Restrictions (PSRs) to ensure that a train does not pass through the section of line at too high a speed. TPWS has also been provided at terminal platforms to ensure the train speed is reduced to 15 mph on the approach to the stops. This has had the effect of reducing capacity at some terminals because of the time taken for trains to clear the routes over the throat into the terminus. This type implementation may also encourage drivers to re-motor when travelling along a platform.

In spite of the limitations of TPWS, it is suggested in published data that 60% of potential accidents due to SPADs can be prevented by the installation of TPWS at critical locations. This has been achieved, it is said, at 10% of the installation costs of a full ATP system. However, this financial target was not achieved because of a decision to monitor the status of the TPWS beacons. With the lack of any in-built failure warning capability for TPWS, it was decided to link installations to the signal in rear, so that, in the event of a TPWS failure, the signal would display a red aspect. This addition to the original specification significantly increased costs.

TPWS does not replace the existing AWS system. AWS is retained, so that drivers still receive the warnings advising of adverse signal indications. The TPWS equipment was designed to interface with the existing on-board AWS equipment on trains or to replace it so that it could be fitted quickly.


Arquivo 028 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB)

In some rural areas of the UK, where long sections of single line require token block operation, a system for centralised control, using modern computer technology, was adopted (Figure 6). It is known as Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB).

Each train operating over the single line is equipped with a special speech and data radio transmitter/receiver with a unique identity. At the start of the single line, the driver stops and calls the control centre for authority to enter the section. If the line is clear, the signalman in the control centre transmits a coded "electronic token" data message which is received by the train and then shows the authority for that section on a cab display. The driver will then call for confirmation that he can enter the section. Once in the single line section, he will advise the control centre that he has cleared the loop track. A clearance marker board is specially provided to help him. When he has reached the end of the single line section, the driver calls the control centre again and offers to give up the token. After a "handshake" procedure by the control centre, he sends the token back by radio data transmission to release the section.

The signaller is provided with a computer system that allocates the coded tokens to each section and prevents more than one token being issued for an occupied section. It also receives the tokens sent back by each train as it reaches the end of the single line section.

At the exits of the single line sections, the points are permanently set in the direction of normal running and are "trailable" for trains entering the section, i.e. they allow a train to pass through at reduced speed using the wheel flanges to move the point (switch) blades aside reset to the normal position.
A "Distant Board" complete with AWS ramp, warns the driver that he must slow down for the movement over the points leaving the single line. The Points Indicator shows the position of the points. A "Stop Board" at the end of the passing loop warns the driver to stop and ask for permission to enter the next single line section. Stop board locations are provided with TPWS loops that are linked by radio to the signal controller. A "Loop Clear" board indicates to the driver when the rear of the train is clear of the points.

An excellent description of the operation of RETB is available at The Modernisation of the Cambrian Lines by Alan Jones on the Signal Box Site. This system has been superceded by the test installation of ERTMS on the route. The East Suffolk Line's system was converted to conventional track circuit block with axle counters when the service frequency was increased to a level where RETB could not have handled it. It was phased out in October 2012. RETB remains in use on several of the more remote routes in Scotland.



Arquivo 029 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

Induktives Sicherungssystem (Indusi, Tyne and Wear Metro, Germany and Austria)

Indusi is a German designed main line railway warning and supervision system used on the Tyne & Wear Metro. It is also standard in Germany and Austria. A track-mounted inductive transponder is used to transmit signal warning and speed limit codes to the train. The transponder is mounted on the sleeper ends just outside the four-foot, unlike most other systems where the transmitter is mounted between the rails.

The approach to a danger signal is protected by a transponder that indicates a maximum speed and causes emergency braking if a preset level is exceeded. On the main line version, an adverse distant signal indication must be acknowledged by the driver to prevent an emergency brake application. More details are available at the Indusi pages, by Wolfgang Meyenberg.

The system is used in Germany for lines with a maximum speed up to 160 km/h and in Austria for line speeds up to 120 km/h. In the more recent electronic version, it includes speed supervision to a braking curve. It is not fully designed to vital standards.

Continuous Automatic Warning System (CAWS, Ireland)

Some sections of the main line routes in the Republic of Ireland and the whole of the line between Dublin and Cork are equipped with coded track circuits that provide in-cab signal indications. The system is known as the Continuous Automatic Warning System (CAWS).

The in-cab signal indications repeat line-side indications and are accompanied by an alarm buzzer when there is a change to a more restrictive aspect. The driver is required to acknowledge the alarm within 8s to prevent an irrevocable automatic emergency brake application. After the operation of the emergency brake, there is a two-minute delay before the system can be reset and the train is allowed to proceed.

The system is not vital in that the driver can acknowledge a restrictive signal warning and can then allow the train to proceed without reducing speed.

Train Stops (Trip-Cocks, London Underground)

LUL uses mechanical train stops combined with fixed blocks and individually calculated signal overlaps to provide train protection on most of its lines. The system prevents collisions by providing an individually calculated full speed braking distance beyond every stop signal so that a train "tripped" by the train stop will come to a stand without infringing a restricted block. Trains are restricted to 10 mph for 3 minutes after being tripped to enforce driving on sight at caution speed. This is known as SCAT (Speed Control After Tripping).

Degraded Operation

None of the systems mentioned is used for continuous speed supervision and all of them can be isolated in the cab and the train can be driven at normal speeds regardless of signal aspects. Most of the systems require a positive action to issue a warning or restrictive data. However, TASS displays some of the behaviour of a true ATP system in that it can detect missing balises.

As mentioned before, in the case of TPWS, the transmitters at a location are linked to the signal in rear so that this signal will show a red aspect in the event of TPWS failure at the next signal. This is because passing trains cannot detect failures of the track-mounted equipment.

Whilst the described systems above all provide some protection against collisions and over-speed derailments, none provide the full and vital protection that is available from modern Automatic Train Protection systems.




Arquivo 030 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Automatic Train Operation with Train Stops (Glasgow Subway). The Glasgow Subway has fixed blocks divided by stations. Each block stretches from station starting signal to station starting signal. There are no intermediate signals except at the depot connection. A recently replaced ATO system uses Siemens equipment with track-mounted beacons and on-broad processors that control the train driving and braking functions. Each station is provided with 2 approach beacons for the ATO profile requirements and a third start beacon in the platform that is linked to the starting signal and provides authority to proceed to the next station. The system software is designed to SIL Level 2.

Train protection is provided by contactless train stops provided at each signal. The equipment was supplied by SAGEM. The track mounted device consists of a permanent magnet supplemented by additional induction coils to indicated a proceed signal. Absence of the induction signal will trigger a train brake command.

If a train fails to respond to the ATO commands (or a train in manual mode passes a signal at danger) the on-board receiver will trigger an irrevocable emergency brake. The driver is required to operate a reset button to restart the train and speed is limited to 25 km/h until another start beacon is passed in the "clear" position.

The Automatic Train Control (ATO and ATP, London Underground). On the Victoria and Central Lines, full Automatic Train Protection is provided by two different Automatic Train Control systems that also include Automatic Train Operation. ATP failure enforces manual driving with speed of movement reduced to 10 mph. The system on the Victoria line was introduced in 1967 and has been replaced by a new Distance to Go (DtG) system together with new rolling stock. The Central line use continuous data transmission through coded track circuits carrying up to 13 different codes. 

The Jubilee and Northern line both have ATC, using the Thales (formerly Seltrac) S40 system using CBTC with track based wire loops. This is marketed as “moving block” although, in reality, it uses small fixed blocks built into the cable loop profile. It is very similar to the system now working on the Docklands Light Railway (see below) and other metro routes in Canada and elsewhere.

The BR-ATP (Two Versions). British Rail installed two Automatic Train Protection systems with full speed supervision for trial purposes in the early 1990s, one on the Great Western Main Line (by ACEC Belgium – now Alstom) and one on Chiltern Railways (Selcab by Alcatel) between Marylebone and Aynho Junction. Both are intermittent systems with infill loops, added to allow early release of the braking demand and its supervision when signal aspects change.

The information transmitted to the train consists of signal aspect, routing, applicable speed restrictions, the distance to the next signal and gradients. Drivers are shown the permitted train speeds by LEDs displayed around the circumference of the cab speedometer. Green LEDs show the target speed while yellow LEDs show the permitted release speed. Information on the number of signals to the next red and speed restrictions is also displayed.

The drivers set up the systems using train data input unit in the cabs that interface with the vehicle computers. The systems generate three speed curves, one for movement authority, a warning curve and an intervention curve. Each is separated by 3 mph. If the train exceeds the warning curve speed, the driver gets an audio/visual warning. If the speed reaches the intervention curves, the brakes are applied.

Although the systems were introduced as a trial they are still operational and, since the Southall accident, it has been the policy for both train-operating companies that a train will not be allowed to enter service unless the ATP system is operational.



Arquivo 031 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Tilt Authorisation and Speed Supervision (TASS). TASS (Tilt Authorisation and Speed Supervision) has been introduced on the West Coast Main Line (WCML) in order to allow tilting train to operate safely within the somewhat restricted UK railway infrastructure gauge. The primary purpose of TASS is to ensure that a train is prevented from tilting where clearances between adjacent trains or between trains and infrastructure are restricted. TASS also imposes line speed limits for equipped trains depending on whether or not the tilting system is operational.

The TASS system is installed on the Virgin Pendolino Class 390and Super Voyager Class 221 fleets and is designed to European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) standards. Data is transmitted to the train by track mounted "Eurobalises" and collected by an antenna mounted under the leading vehicle. Speed limits are different for the two classes of tilting trains.

The speed limits for tilting trains are displayed on line-side signs alongside the signage for non-tilting trains. As the train passes over the first TASS balise, the driver is shown an indication light to verify the operating status of the system. Each TASS balise transmits to the train-borne equipment the position of the next balise, thus ensuring a continuous ‘daisy-chain’ of supervision. A further indication shows when tilt is enabled. The driver is responsible for driving within the correct speed throughout the trip. AWS and TPWS are provided since TASS does not sense or transmit signal aspects.

Over-speed is indicated by an audio-visual alarm and, if speed is not reduced, the train brakes are applied automatically. The brakes are released and the alarm can be reset when the train speed is reduced to the correct level. Where clearances are restricted, the train automatically stops tilting but the speed is still monitored by TASS. The train speed must be reduced by 25 mph, that is, conventional operation, if tilt fails or a balise is not detected.

The Docklands Light Railway. The Docklands Light Railway (DLR) uses an ATP system with full continuous speed supervision known as Seltrac, originally supplied by Alcatel of Canadaand now part of the Thales empire . Seltrac is a transmission-based, automatic train control (ATC) system, combining both automatic train protection (ATP) and automatic train operation (ATO). The duplex transmission system is via a continuous track mounted cable, with loops crossovers at 25m intervals forming train position validators. Effectively, the system provides pseudo moving block capability thanks to very short ‘virtual’ blocks. Train detection and inductive data transmission between track and train are effected by means of the cable. A fixed block back-up system uses axle counters for train detection.

Trains are operated fully automatically without driver intervention but a train captain is provided on every train and can operate the train at reduced speed in an emergency. A Vehicle On Board Computer (VOBC), linked to the transmission system, controls the on-board vital and driving functions. All trains are controlled by Vehicle Control Computers (VCCs) from a central control facility.

The system has a good safety record but it requires continuous track cables and uses a back-up axle counter train detection system. It is therefore relatively expensive to install and maintain. As with any system requiring extensive track-mounted cabling, there is the risk of damage to the cables during track maintenance activities. This type of system can only be considered for a metro-type operation with a high service frequency.

The Transmission Voie-Machine 430 (TVM 430). Phase 1 of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL) is equipped with the French continuous transmission ATP system known as TVM 430. This is also the system used in the Channel Tunnel and the system that will be used on Phase 2 (except for the station area at St. Pancras International. TVM 430 ("track to train transmission") is a cab signalling system used on the more recent TGV lines, developed from the earlier TVM 300 system by the French company CSEE.

With TVM 430, the line is divided into fixed blocks from 500 to 1500m long. The length of the block depends on the location, civil track speed limit and the train capacity required in the area. Line-side marker boards indicate block boundaries visually. Each block carries a speed code that is injected into the rails as part of the track circuit current and transmitted to the train as it progresses through the block. There are five standard codes representing speed limits between 0 km/h and 300 km/h. The codes are generated according to the condition of the route ahead, that is, the distance to the next ‘obstacle’. In the case of a failure, the driver can "drive on sight" up to a maximum speed of 35 km/h.

The driver is presented with the codes in the cab display with the target speed at the end of the current block and the target speed at the end of the following block. The target speed is the speed at which the train should exit the current block and enter the next.

In older versions of TVM, the target speed indication for the driver was updated only at every block boundary, resulting in a stepped speed profile. With TVM 430 the train has a continuously varying target speed through calculations by the on-board computer, giving a much more realistic speed profile for the driver to follow.

Eurostar trains are provided with a system of network codes in order to allow the train to comply with varying line speed limits over different routes. On lines where the maximum speed limit is 300 km/h (186 mph), a different network code is used from that used on the section through the Channel Tunnel, where the speed limit is 160 km/h (100 mph).

TVM is a safe, reliable and well-proven system but it relies on track circuit based continuous transmission technology and is therefore expensive to install and maintain.



Arquivo 032 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

WARNING AND TRAIN STOP SYSTEMS IN USE IN CONTINENTAL EUROPE

Crocodile (France). This is a French designed AWS system very similar in concept to the UK AWS. The name derives from the corrugated appearance of the track-mounted equipment. It is officially described as Brosse Repetition Signal (BRS). BRS is installed on all main lines of SNCF, SNCB and CFL. A brush on the train contacts the track-mounted device as it passes. +/- 20V from a battery is supplied to the Crocodile, depending on the signal aspect. There is a bell and flashing light indication to the driver and, if not acknowledged, an automatic brake application occurs.

Crocodile only acts as a vigilance system. Crocodile is less safe than AWS since absence of voltage cannot be detected. It does not provide any warning to the driver if it becomes defective. It may now be considered as outdated.

ASFA (Spain). ASFA is a cab-signalling and train protection system widely used in Spain. Intermittent track-to-train communication is based on magnetically coupled resonant circuits in such a way that nine different sets of data can be transmitted. A resonant circuit trackside is tuned to a frequency representing the signal aspect. The system is not fail safe, but reminds the driver of the signalling conditions and requires him to acknowledge restrictive aspects within 3s. Lamp and bell warnings are provided for the driver.

Three different train types can be selected on-board to give continuous speed supervision of line speed and after passing a restrictive signal (160 km/h or 180 km/h). A speed check can be carried out (60 km/h, 50 km/h or 35 km/h, depending on train type) after passing a transponder 300m before reaching a stop signal and a train trip is provided at signals at danger. There is an irrevocable emergency brake upon violation.

The Automatische Trein Beïnvloeding (ATB EG, Netherlands). The Dutch railways ATB system appears in two basic versions on Dutch railway lines - ATB EG and ATB NG. ATB-EG ("ATB Eerste Generatie": ATB first generation) is the original continuous system and ATB-NG ("ATB Nieuwe Generatie": ATB new generation) is a new intermittent system designed for speeds up to 360 km/h – see next section.

ATB EG is installed on the vast majority of lines of ProRail (the new Dutch infrastructure authority) and is a fail-safe system using coded track circuits of conventional design and two versions of on-board equipment, ACEC (computerised) or GRS (electronic). The transmission between coded track circuits and on-board equipment is via vehicle-mounted induction pickup coils suspended above the rails.

There are six speed codes (40, 60, 80, 130 or 140 km/h) that are picked up by the train and displayed to the driver. There is a gong warning at a code change and a bell if the system requests a brake application. The emergency brake is invoked on over-speed or if the driver does not react to an acoustic warning.

The system does not distinguish between the 40km/h limit and stop. This allows driving on sight in the event of an equipment failure.

The Transmission Balise Locomotive – (TBL, Belgium). TBL is available in two versions, TBL1 and TBL2. TBL1 simply provides an advance indication of the signal aspect followed by an emergency brake application,  together with a train trip function for signals passed at danger. Data is supplied through track-mounted loops. The TBL loops require an external power supply, unlike most other balise systems.

The BACC (Italy). BACC is installed on most of the infrastructure of RFI (Rete Ferroviaria Italiana) in two versions, both of which operate in a similar way. Conventional coded track circuits operate at one of two carrier frequencies to deal with two train classes – those operating either above or below 180 km/h. The transmission between coded track circuits and on-board equipment is via induction pickup coils suspended above the rails.

For the <180 km/h trains a 50Hz carrier frequency is used for 5 amplitude modulated (AM) speed codes. A 178 Hz carrier frequency with 10 AM speed codes is used for higher speed trains. In the cab the driver sees the speed corresponding to the code and the signal aspect. The emergency brake is applied upon over-speed but can be released when the speed is reduced to the approved level. The version of BACC used on the Rome to Florence high-speed line is effectively an automatic train protection system with full speed supervision.




Arquivo 033 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

FULL AUTOMATIC TRAIN PROTECTION SYSTEMS IN USE IN CONTINENTAL EUROPE

The Automatische Trein Beïnvloeding (ATB NG, Netherlands). The ATB NG system was introduced to the NS (Netherlands) in the mid-1990s to implement full ATP and to eliminate the expensive and maintenance intensive coded track circuits. It consists of track mounted balises and on-board computing equipment. An infill function based on a cable loop is also available. The data transmission is between the active balise and an antenna on-board. The system is direction sensitive, so the balises are mounted between the rails with a small offset from the centre line. ATB NG on-board equipment is fully interoperable with the original ATB EG trackside equipment. 

To initialise the system, the driver must input train length, maximum speed and brake characteristics. The driver has a display for maximum line speed, the target speed, the target distance and the braking curve. The line speed, speed restrictions, the target stopping point and the brake performance are monitored. Advance warning audio and visual alarms of over-speeds are provided. The emergency brake is invoked if movement supervision is violated or the driver does not react to a warning.

The Ebicab (Sweden, Norway, etc.). Ebicab is the standard ATP system in Sweden, Norway, Portugal and Bulgaria. Identical software in Sweden and Norway enables cross-border train operations without changing drivers or locomotives, despite the differences in signalling systems and rules. Software variations are used for the systems in Portugal and Bulgaria.

There are two versions of the system, Ebicab 700 and Ebicab 900, both providing similar safety functions. The system consists of signal encoders sending data to balises mounted in the middle of the track that are in communication with on-board computerised equipment. The data transmission takes place between passive balises (two to five per signal) and an antenna under the vehicle that also powers up the balise as it passes above it.

Inputs by the driver include the usual train parameters plus a facility to advise the train-borne computer of adverse railhead conditions. Displays show the driver the maximum line speed, target speed and advanced information for up to five blocks’ worth of speed restrictions beyond the first signal. The time to a service brake intervention is also shown if an over-speed is predicted, together with three warnings.

Service braking is initiated when the train speed exceeds the permitted speed by 10 km/h (5 km/h for Ebicab 900) but this is released when the speed has returned to the permitted level. If an emergency brake is initiated by failure to maintain the required deceleration through the service brake, the train must come to a stand before it can be released. A default speed of 40 km/h is allowed for trains passing a signal under authorisation or to cope with failure modes.

The KVB (France). This is the standard ATP system used in France and is technically similar to Ebicab, although the information provided on the driver’s display is more limited. The system is installed on the conventional railway network, in particular on the routes where high speed trains (trains à grande vitesse or TGV) approach major termini. Some sections of the high-speed lines (ligne Ã  grande vitesse or LGV) use the system in place of or together with TVM for certain spot transmissions and for the supervision of temporary speed restrictions where appropriate speed levels are not available from TVM codes. Spot transmissions include such items as door release authority, overhead line section switches and radio channel changes.

The system is overlaid on the conventional signalling system. The data is transmitted inductively between passive balises (between two and nine may be required per signal) and the on-board antenna which activates (powers up) the balise as it passes. The data transmission capacity is limited, hence the need for many additional balises.

The driver must input train data unless the train is a modern, fixed formation unit, where data is automatically programmed into the on-board supervision computer. In the event of any over-speed, the driver will receive a warning and then an irrevocable emergency brake will apply. The brake cannot be released until the train is at a stand.

This system is provided on Eurostar trains and it is installed on certain limited sections of the CTRL, most notably on the approach to St. Pancras station.



Arquivo 034 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html
TBL 2 (Belgium). TBL 2 is used on all lines in Belgium where the permitted line speed is greater than 160 km/h. TBL 2 is a cab signal system and is similar to the UK GWML ATP system (see under Britain) which uses a powered balise in the form of a steel loop with additional, long infill cable loops provided to give early warning of signal indication changes. TBL 2 is direction sensitive. This capability is provided by having the balises mounted between the rails with a small offset from the centre.

The driver is shown the maximum allowed speed (from a braking curve), the target speed, the target distance and the train speed. Audio-visual warnings of violations are provided with an emergency brake in the event of no acknowledgement.

The Linienförmige Zugbeeinflussung (LZB). This is a continuous ATP system installed on all lines in Germany where speeds exceed 160 km/h. It is also installed on some lines in Austria and on the Spanish high-speed line (alta velocidád or AVE) between Madrid and Sevilla. The on-board equipment is normally integrated with the German Indusi system and incident recorders. Data transmission is via inductive cable loops and on-board ferrite antennae. One conductor of the loop is clipped to the foot of one of the running rails while the other is fixed in the middle of sleepers. The two conductors are crossed over at regular intervals to allow the trains to obtain an accurate reading of position and speed thanks to the 180° phase shift.

The driver inputs train length, maximum train speed and train braking characteristics. A two-needle speedometer displays the maximum permitted speed and actual speed. A separate linear display provides the operating mode, the status of data transmission as well as the target speed and the distance to the target (limit of movement authority).

The on-board system monitors line speed including temporary and permanent speed restrictions, maximum train speed, the target stopping point, the train’s direction and the dynamic speed profile. It is also capable of including auxiliary functions, such as circuit breaker and pantograph operation. The emergency brake is called if the speed supervision is violated. The brake can be released when the train speed is restored within limits.

The system can be used in vital automatic train control connected with automatic motor and brake control. Line-side signals are not required for LZB equipped trains. Drivers of such trains are instructed to ignore wayside signals that are provided for non-equipped trains. LZB is the earliest continuous automatic train protection system that is not track circuit based, to the best knowledge of the authors of this report.



Arquivo 035 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

EUROPEAN INTEROPERABLE RAILWAYS

The European Interoperability Directives.  The question of the application of full ATP on UK railways cannot be separated from the requirements for European interoperability. It would not be legal or cost effective to pursue a policy of ATP installation on the UK network without incorporating the technical requirements for interoperability. Rolling stock and signalling suppliers in the UK are already installing equipment that is compliant with or capable of upgrading to the standards required by European interoperability directives and the Technical Standards for Interoperability (TSIs).

The European interoperability requirements are enshrined in the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS). ERTMS has been developed to support the implementation of two European 'interoperability' directives: 96/48/EC for high-speed lines and 2001/16/EC for conventional services. These offer guidelines for the adoption of technical standards across the EU for rolling stock, traction current and signalling and control systems. The technical requirements and UK national guidelines for high-speed lines have already been issued and those for conventional railways are expected shortly.

The routes requiring interoperable systems for high-speed lines are defined in the Trans European Network (TEN). Four UK high-speed main lines are included in the TEN:

The West Coast Main Line

The East Coast Main Line

The Great Western Main Line and

The Channel Tunnel Rail Link

The European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) is a fundamental building block for the implementation of interoperability on the TEN. The European Train Control System (ETCS) covers the physical signalling and train control part of ERTMS.

ETCS

The ETCS specification has three substantially different ATP operating levels allowing a stepped transition from conventional line-side signalling to a full moving block concept, with some incremental additions. The levels provide full speed supervision and varying amounts of in-cab information, throughout a train’s journey, and may be summarised as follows:

Level 1 – No Infill (System A)

The Level 1 system is overlaid on existing visual signalling systems. It is based on Eurobalises providing ATP supervision and protection. It can have an adverse effect on route capacity, in a range of 5-15%, generally, because of trains having to reduce the speed as demanded by the supervision curve before receiving new information at the next signal position.

Level 1 – With Infill (System B)

This level uses infill signal indication updates between the main balises, either by means of additional balises, using so-called EuroLoop or by radio. The driver thus receives updated information on the status of the next signal(s) before reaching the main balises. This option reduces the adverse effect on route capacity, but is more expensive to install and operate, as additional line-side equipment is required.

Level 2

Level 2 uses conventional, fixed block train detection (with track circuits or axle counters) but the driver receives all train movement authority information via bi-directional GSM-R radio. It has full continuous ATP supervision and protection with in-cab signalling displays. It can improve route capacity and line-side signals can be removed. With signals retained it is referred to as System C and with signals removed as System D.

Level 3

Fixed blocks are not required for Level 3. This level uses balises and on-board tachometry to detect train position. All conventional signalling is removed and all data communication is via GSM-R radio. It can improve route capacity but, although technically feasible, it has not been proven on an existing main line railway and, in our view, it currently represents a significant risk in terms of operability and reliability. These issues have yet to be resolved.

United Kingdom Development

ETCS was installed on the Cambrian Line in Wales. The project involved the equipment of 14 trains and 220 route-km of railway with full ETCS Level 2 equipment, RBCs and GSM-R communications. The existing Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB) and line-side signals were removed Cab signalling has been provided on the trains (Class 158 DMUs and Class 37 Locomotives). The system became operational in 2010. Another installation has been installed on the Hertford loop line both of London. This is electrified and is currently being used as a test bed for various fleets being introduced with ETCS equipment already installed.

The objective is to fit the UK network with ETCS Level 2 or 3 wherever a business case can be made. In a number of areas this could involve conventional lines, community railways, including those requiring operating subsidy.




Arquivo 036 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

The Global System for Mobile communications (GSM-R). The introduction of ETCS Levels 2/3 is reliant on the installation of GSM-R as the data and speech carrier. The testing and installation of the system for UK ETCS is running in parallel with the Cambrian Line trials. The UK train radio system and fixed telephone network are also being upgraded. Any failure of the GSM-R project to maintain parallel implementation with ETCS will delay the implementation of train control interoperability in the UK. There is some suggstion that bandwidth is an issue already for GSM-R and that there's no capacity in the existing equipment for anything more than normal traffic. Emergency traffic might overload the system.

GSM-R or satellite based train control systems will still require some ground based validation (passive Eurobalises) and train detection through track circuits will very likely be required for turnout locking and in complex junction areas.

The Conventional (Community) Railways. The ETCS technical requirements for conventional railways are not yet published but it is very likely that the equipment will be similar to and compatible with that required for high-speed lines. This will allow trains to move freely between ETCS fitted high-speed lines and community railways without the need for dual fitting of different systems.

It is inevitable that existing conventional railways will continue to use the systems that are currently standard in the country of origin and that the progress towards commonality will be slow. Both the high-speed and conventional interoperability regulations drawn up by the British authorities require that new rolling stock and signalling equipment be designed and built to accommodate ETCS equipment in addition to any "legacy" equipment needed to operate on the existing railway network. This has already been achieved on the Eurostar fleets and, in principle, therefore could be applied to existing UK fleets.

Conventional lines should be converted to ETCS as systems are due for renewal or where the use of communications based train control can be shown to reduce substantially the operating and maintenance costs.

The Metros and Light Railways. Although most metro systems worldwide are already fitted with more or less advanced train protection system and risks are generally low, there are European Union moves to standardise a unified European Urban ATP system. Implementation of this is likely to be a long-term objective since most operators have their own standards. The benefits of the adoption of a unified metro train protection might seem to be small but could lead to substantial reductions in replacement costs.

Questions of interfaces with main line railways must be addressed. In the UK this relates particularly to London Underground and the Newcastle Metro. Both systems share lines with Network Rail and must be considered in the context of interoperability for community or conventional (non-high speed) railways. There will also be the question of electro-magnetic interference on shared and adjacent routes, which will require a separate study for each route. This will also apply to light rail routes adjacent to main line systems like those in Wimbledon (Croydon) and Nottingham.



Arquivo 037 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

FUTURE STRATEGY

The High Speed Line Requirements. The difficulty of preventing driver perception overload has resulted in a situation in Britain where line-side signals are no longer acceptable for trains running at speeds greater than 125 mile/h. In order to provide an increase in operating speeds to 140mph and above, full ATP with cab signalling will be essential and the use of ETCS compliant equipment is the logical way to provide this.

The existing systems will have to be retained for conventional trains and may also be required for fall-back purposes at least during the early years of operation of any stand-alone ETCS Level 2/3 system, until reliability and operational experience allow removal of line-side signals.

The Conventional Railways. It will be a logical progression for conventional railways to incorporate ATP using ETCS standards when signalling renewals become unavoidable. It is likely that this will be shown as a cost effective solution for renewals once the GSM-R network has been developed and the removal of full line-side signalling has been accepted as viable.

The European Mandates. With the mandates issued by the European Community for the introduction of common train control systems on high-speed railways already being enshrined in national law and the forthcoming extension of this requirement to conventional railways, it will be necessary for UK main line railways to consider full ATP installation and, if it is decided to proceed, this will have to comply with the Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs) issued by the European Community.

It is the authors’ view that the future strategy for train protection in the UK should be based on the continued use of AWS/TPWS until replaced by ATP in conformity with the ETCS requirements. The replacement will have to be carried out on a route upgrade basis.

It may be possible to consider other, low cost systems such as CBTC, as long as these are acceptable for lightly used community railways in remote areas with relatively low frequency services and a dedicated rolling stock fleet. However, it may be found that standardisation of ETCS across the whole network is more cost effective.

The Life Cycle Approach. It is essential to view the implementation of any new system on the basis of a life cycle approach. The railway business does not allow for rapid technological change. The cost of equipment and the need to design to robust specifications to protect against a harsh operating environment leads to the need for a long period of depreciation before replacement. This restricts the capacity for adopting technological change and development. Shortages of skills will further limit change to what can be managed in a life-cycle replacement programme.

New electronics-based systems tend to have shorter life spans than traditional railway technology. Typical life periods of 15 years are now being adopted in project assessments for electronic systems as opposed to the traditional railway periods of 30-40 years. The 15 to 20 years may well be the maximum period for which suppliers will maintain spares for their products. However, well-designed, modular systems lend themselves to component replacement once subsystems become obsolescent, as has been shown in the case of the Victoria Line in London. A new ATP system will require a life cycle analysis to determine its cost-effectiveness.



Arquivo 038 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/train-protection.html

Making a Business Case. In any strategic decision making process, the viability of the proposals from a cost/benefit perspective must be taken into account. In the case of the installation of full ATP on the UK railway network, there should be a review of the benefits and how much it will cost to achieve and maintain those benefits. Looking at these issues in depth and developing a strong business and safety rationale for implementation will lead to wider acceptance by railway companies and government agencies alike.

As an example, in examining the UK main line rail system, it can be seen that some 12% of the network has a line speed of 35mph or less and a further 55% has line speeds between 40 and 75mph. These lines are fully protected by TPWS. On the other hand, high-speed routes (only 17 per cent of the UK network) contribute 49 per cent of the ATP safety benefit and high-density passenger routes with line speeds of between 60 mph and 100 mph (22 per cent of the network) contribute 33 per cent of the ATP safety benefit. In conjunction with renewal requirements, it could be shown where the most benefit will be obtained from the introduction of ETCS compliant ATP.

With the completion of TPWS and TPWS+ over the UK network, the benefits of installing a fully ETCS compliant ATP system will be difficult to sustain in many areas.

A case for ETCS fitment might be augmented by operational advantages or the need for interoperability with the ETCS fitted network. It is possible that a detailed examination will show that a financial case for ETCS installation could be supported by the elimination of line-side visual signals and by improvements in line capacity. However, this will only be achieved when the technical reliability of the systems is universally accepted.

The question is further complicated when maintenance is considered. The goal of infrastructure managers is to reduce line-side or track-based hardware that requires regular maintenance. However, the balance must be found between the cost of supplying sophisticated technology and maintaining the software with highly qualified technicians on the one hand and the ground-based hardware requiring regular but cheaper maintenance on the other. With modern safe working practice requirements and the expansion of electronic signalling systems and its associated expertise, this balance will most likely favour ETCS systems.

In the case of new trains, however, the position over the provision of ETCS capability is clearer - all new stock is being provided with at least the physical capability of accommodating ETCS. It should also be a requirement that the future design of rolling stock should allow for the needs and sensitivities of the new generation of electronic control and protection systems.



Arquivo 039 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

A railway train is an ideal system for automation. It uses a fixed guidance system, its acceleration and braking can be predicted, its position detected, its direction confirmed and its timing regulated. All this makes automation of train control a relatively simple task. However, there are limitations:
Train formations that can vary need to be individually registered into the system;
Variations to railhead conditions need to be factored into the system;
Not all existing railways are ideal for automation and may need significant upgrades.
Nevertheless, automation has considerable benefits for safety and performance and can offer better throughput of trains of up to 8% just by the elimination of manual driving variability.
The Origins of Automation. The automation of train movements was gradually developed from the need to enforce signal commands so that drivers could not allow trains to pass beyond their limit of movement authority (LMA). We discuss this further in our Train Protection page. The automation of train control was developed from there, using advances in traction control, which gave automatic acceleration and in braking, which could incorporate electrical control and automatic load compensation.

Originally, in Britain, the letters ATC referred to "Automatic Train Control", which was the title given to the warning system tried on some UK lines before the general introduction of the AWS (Automatic Warning System) in the 1960s. In the US it also refers to Automatic Train Control but it refers to a more modern concept where the system includes ATP (Automatic Train Protection), ATO (Automatic Train Operation) and ATS (Automatic Train Supervision). ATC has been adopted around the world to describe the architecture of the automatically operated railway. It is usually applied to metros. In this article we examine several different automatic train concepts.

As a definition, ATC refers to the whole system which includes all the other automatic functions and, for some of these functions at least, also includes a degree of manual intervention. ATC therefore, is the package which includes ATP, ATO and ATS.


Arquivo 040 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The ATC Package. The first part of the package of an ATC system is Automatic Train Protection (ATP), where the train is given a Limit of Movement Authority (LMA). This is based on the train’s current speed, its braking capability and the distance it can go before it must stop. On a manually driven train, the driver manages this through a combination of route and stock knowledge and the visual information received from wayside signals. On the automated train, the data for the LMA is transmitted from the track to the train where the on-board computer registers the current speed and calculates the target speed that the train must reach and by when. This is electronically plotted in the form of a braking curve. If the train is allowed to exceed the profile of the curve, the brakes will automatically apply to bring the train to a stand (or at least to within the permitted speed). 
The second part of an ATC system is Automatic Train Operation (ATO). This is the driving part of the operation. Looking at a manually driven train, we will see that the driver initiates the starting of the train, allows its acceleration to the permitted speed, slows it where necessary for speed restrictions and stops at designated stations in the correct location. The ATO system will carry out these parts of the operation with the  exception that the driver normally initiates the train start. There are a number of different systems used to perform the ATO functions but they all involve data communication between the train and the train and most require some form of on-board route map. 
The data received by the ATP control unit is usually limited to indicating that a train is in the block or the speed limit currently imposed in the block.  This data is sent to the ATS computer where it is compared with the timetable to determine if the train is running according to schedule or is late or early.  To adjust the train's timing, the ATS can send commands to the ATO spots located along the track.

The ATO spots, which can be short transmission loops or small boxes called beacons or "balises", give the train its station stop commands. The spots usually contain fixed data but some, usually the last one in a station stop sequence, transmit data about the time the train should stop (the dwell time) at the station and may tell it how fast to go to the next station (ATP permitting). 

Some systems leave the ATO spots alone - i.e their data is always fixed - but use the ATP system to prevent the train from starting or restrict its speed.  The ATS computer tells the ATP control unit to transmit a restricted speed or zero speed to the track.

Both ATP and ATO commands are picked up by receivers on the train and translated into motoring, braking or coasting commands.  Where a train can be manually driven, the ATP will still ensure the safety requirement but the ATO is overridden, the driver stopping the train in the stations by use of the cab controls.

There are lots of variations of ATC around the world but all contain the basic principle that ATP provides safety and is the basis upon which the train is allowed to run.  ATO provides controls to replace the driver, while ATS checks the running times and adjusts train running accordingly.



Arquivo 041 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The Overlap. If a line is equipped with a simple ATP system which automatically stops a train if it passes a red signal, it will not prevent a collision with a train in front if this train is standing immediately beyond the signal.
There must be room for the train to brake to a stop - see the diagram above. This is known as a "safe braking distance" and space is provided beyond each signal to accommodate it. In reality, the signal is placed in rear of the entrance to the block and the distance between it and the block is called the "overlap". Signal overlaps are calculated to allow for the safe braking distance of the trains using this route. Of course, lengths vary according to the site; gradient, maximum train speed and train brake capacity are all used in the calculation.

Overlaps are often provided on main line railways too. In the UK, it is the practice to provide a 200 yard (185 m) overlap beyond each main line signal in a colour light installation. Back in 1972 when it was decided upon, it was, after a review of many instances where trains had overrun stop signals, considered the maximum normally required. It was a rather crude risk analysis but it was the best they could afford.

In the US, the overlap is considered so important that a whole block is provided as the overlap. It is referred to as "absolute block". This means that there is always a vacant block between trains. It's rather wasteful of space and it reduces capacity but it saves the need to calculate and then build in overlaps for each signal, so it's cheaper. Like a lot of things in life, you get what you pay for. 
The Communications Based Train Control. Much of the development effort in the area of new signalling systems is concentrated on removing reliance on track-based equipment. Generically, this type of technology is referred to as Communications Based Train Control (CBTC) and is broadly similar to ETCS Levels 2 or even 3 in as much as conventional track circuits are not necessarily required for train detection. Where trains do not report their own location using tachometers, Doppler radar and balises, detection can be provided additionally by combinations of track circuits, or by means of Global Positioning by Satellite (GPS) or Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) as they are now called. Some systems reduce or eliminate the need for fixed track based systems like track circuits and axle counters and rely instead on a combination of train borne speed and location data  together with balises and GNSS.

Some CBTC systems use radio-based data bearers to transmit train locations to the central control computers. These are now being used on some metros and people-mover systems like the Las Vegas Monorail. However, some track-based data is still usually considered essential in locations where track separation for parallel tracks and turnout (point) locking is required.

In the US, systems using GNSS are being introduced as part of the federal requirements to introduce Positive Train Control (PTC) over 60,000 miles of railroads. The complexity of installing PTC is further complicated by the fact that there are 10 different systems in use across the US. The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) lists the types in their PTC Systems Page and shows progress on their PTC Overview Page.

It should be noted that some of the systems using satellite links for train separation were designed in the first instance for areas of "dark territory" where line-side signals are not provided and trains are controlled by train orders and track warrants. The CBTC systems are used to increase throughput and crossing point efficiency whilst not reducing safety.

There is value in considering such systems for use in the UK, particularly where remote routes with low train frequency might have to be closed without a reduction in infrastructure replacement and maintenance costs. GNSS based systems can also be used for passenger information both on trains and at stations.

A further possibility for the use of GNSS is to trigger the warning on the approach to a level crossing with a constant-time lapse regardless of the speed of the train. In a similar way, track workers could be alerted to the approach of a train within a known fixed time.




Arquivo 042 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

Distance To Go – Radio (DTG-R). The Westinghouse Rail Systems (now Siemens) DTG-R (Distance To Go - Radio) system installed on the London Underground’s Victoria Line is the first instance of a full ATP application using radio-based data bearers in the UK. The system is based on fixed block train detection with vital radio data transmission between each interlocking area and the train. It operates in conjunction with ATO and replaced the induction based transmission system originally used on the line.
The line is divided into what Westinghouse engineers referred to as "interlockings" even where only plain line is provided. An interlocking usually covers a station and the tracks halfway to the next station. Block occupancy data is collected by the Westrace interlocking and passed to a Fixed Block Processor, which converts the data into a radio message. The radio message transmits the block occupancy and proceed status to the train. Geographical data on the line profile and Permanent Speed restrictions (PSRs) is carried on the train. Train positioning is updated by track-mounted balises called Absolute Position References (APRs).

Trains operate under ATO but are capable of operating under full ATP protection with manual driving. The ATO system is similar to the existing Central Line installation using loops known as Platform ATO Communication (PAC) loops. The failure mode restricts manual driving on sight to 10 mile/h.
Design, Delivery, Migration and Integration

There are a considerable number of technical and operational problems to be overcome before installation of ETCS compatible ATP and migration towards full operation of ATP on the running railway can be achieved. Promoters of any future legislation must be aware of these and of what can be done realistically before any new regulations are introduced. The issues listed below will affect the credibility of those affected as  well as the regulators themselves.

• System and component approvals;

• Line capacity;

• The wide variety of existing rolling stock to be fitted with new systems and the effort involved in the physical installation;

• The interfaces between on-board systems and new ATP equipment;

• The interfaces between new ATP equipment and existing signalling and control equipment;

• Mixed system operation;

• New operating rules;

• Conflicts between manufacturers over intellectual property rights;

• Reliability and maintainability;

• Failure modes and degraded operations;

• Interfaces between railway systems (e.g., high-speed and community lines, community lines and metros); Phasing of migration;

• Signal engineering skills shortages.




Arquivo 043 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The Approvals. Using lessons learned from previous introductions of new train protection systems, both in the UK and continental Europe, there is an opportunity for the approvals process required for new ATP systems to be implemented smoothly and such systems to be deployed rapidly. Operators, owners, suppliers and installers should be encouraged to interface with the regulatory authorities as early as possible.

In looking towards future developments, there is a risk that accepted standards in place today will reduce the drive to improve and develop new systems because of changes required to existing standards. The process of changing and getting approval for compliance with new standards could act as a deterrent to improvements unless standards are carefully written to allow improvements.

The Line Capacity. It is a widely held view in the industry that the introduction of ATP will reduce line capacity. This is not necessarily the case in all areas and there are positive benefits from the use of ETCS Level 2/3 in terms of train throughput.

In simple terms, a train’s speed on the approach to the block will have to conform to the safe braking distance profile. However, there is no reason why ECTS Level 2 should not be capable of supporting the existing capacity and, indeed, improving on it using shorter fixed blocks. As it does not require fixed blocks, Level 3 will improve capacity in most areas.

Retrofitting ATP to Rolling Stock

In respect of retrofitting ATP equipment to existing rolling stock, the lessons of the fitting of BR-ATP to the HST Class 43 First Great Western fleet and the Chiltern Railways Class 165/168 DMU fleet should be clearly understood and widely disseminated to operators, suppliers and regulators. These lessons resulted in the need for some time-consuming and expensive measures:

 Overcome underestimated fitting requirements;

 Rewire parts of rolling stock;

 Overcome drivers’ resistance;

 Increase reliability;

 Rectify intermittent failures in an intermittent transmission system;

 Reduce equipment self-test and boot-up time;

 Increase maintenance requirements;

 Increase and repeat training;

 Manage TSR and ESR implementation;

 Manage adhesion issues.

It is recommended that a group with a mandate to address lessons learned by both UK and overseas organisations concerned with the design, manufacturing, testing, commissioning, approval and operation of ETCS should be set up and maintained to act as a reservoir of knowledge and  experience with the objective of reducing the problems associated with the implementation of new and enhanced ATP systems.

There will doubtless be some rolling stock whose age precludes a cost-effective case for fitting new ETCS equipment and which will continue to operate with legacy equipment.





Arquivo 044 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The Skills Shortages. Any railway signalling developments proposed for the next 10 years will depend on the availability of suitable engineering and installation skills. A large proportion of the relevant UK skills base will be absorbed by the London Underground PPP contracts that cover the re-signalling of over 300 route-km of London Underground lines in the period 2006 to 2017. The equipment to be supplied is novel, ATP based throughout, with complex performance requirements and is still in development. Existing skills shortages in the UK are forcing the contracting companies to source part of the project staff from overseas. Modernisation of the UK main line signalling infrastructure with ETCS based equipment will require similar skills. Shortages, if not addressed immediately, are likely to slow down all replacement programmes.

The Operating Rules. Adapted and new operating rules will need to be written for the new train protection systems introduced to the railway network. Amongst other issues, these rules will have to cover:

 Normal operations, e.g., driving with or without line-side signals under ETCS Levels 2 and 3;

 Failure modes and required actions, e.g., loss of radio contact, failure of on-board equipment;

 Protection of disabled trains;
 Possessions of the track by the maintainer;

 Starting and stabling of trains;

 Movement of trains within station limits;

 Shunting.

Many of these processes will have to change significantly compared with existing practices and will, during the migration periods, have to be run in parallel with them. These circumstances could cause serious delays to train operations or present significant safety risks and should be included in any assessments carried out to determine the methods for introducing ATP.

In particular, the man-machine interface must not be forgotten. The success and acceptance of ATP systems will depend to a substantial extent on drivers’ ability to understand and act upon the normal operational modes and failure modes possible with complex ETCS and similar ATP systems. Areas for further exploration concern the man-machine interface, the requirements for revoking authority (replacing signals to danger) and driver supervised movements.

Roll Back Detection

To provide complete protection, any ATP system adopted will have to incorporate some form of roll-away detection, including roll-back. If this is to be fitted to existing rolling stock, further interface issues will have to be resolved.


Arquivo 045 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

TSRs and ESRs

In any ATP system, the requirement to impose temporary or emergency speed restrictions (TSRs and ESRs) must be considered. In theory, this would seem simply a matter of placing a passive balise on the approach to the speed restriction with its required speed suitably pre-programmed. However, the issue of gradient effects and how this would be calculated and programmed into the balise must be considered. The quality control of such programming is vital and suitable methodologies must be agreed and monitored. In any case, there is a need to stipulate a standard default mode for temporary balises.

Migration

A range of complex technical and operational issues will need to be considered as part of the development of migration plans for each area to be upgraded to ATP. These will include:

 Technical interfaces;

 Operational changes (see rules above);

 Electro-magnetic compatibility;

 Integration with existing systems;

 Retrofitting to existing rolling stock.

Looking at the existing installations of signalling equipment, both at the line side and on rolling stock, it is likely that new ETCS equipment will have to operate alongside existing systems for at least 30 years.

Degraded Modes – Effects of Failures on Safety and Operations

There are a considerable number of issues related to the effects of failures and the resulting degraded modes of operation. A careful balance must be found between ensuring train movements can continue whilst risk is minimised when operating trains under degraded modes of ECTS and other advanced forms of train protection.

Degraded modes will include the initiation of a brake application by the equipment because of driver error as well as equipment malfunction. A clear distinction should be made between the two but it may be necessary to impose operating rules that assume driver error even in the event of equipment failure. Detailed studies and consultation with regulators and operators are required to ensure the correct rules are understood and agreed prior to equipment installation.

A range of speed limit values for a train protection system, e.g., maximum speeds for different blocks, supervision and intervention speeds [Woodland, 2005], a brake release speed, a shunt speed, a non-supervised speed, a rollback speed, a reverse speed, an on-sight speed etc., will lead to a complex matrix of controls and rules which will lead to poor reliability and possible driver or maintainer confusion.

Basic speed limits will have to be imposed in the event of equipment failure but these should be limited in number and should cover reversing moves, shunting on ATP lines, coupling and uncoupling and recovery modes where possible.



Arquivo 046 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

Degraded Adhesion

All ATP systems fitted to trains operating over open areas of railway infrastructure will be subject to the effects of degraded adhesion from time to time. This is a particular problem in the temperate UK climate and has led to a number of attempts to mitigate the effects on train braking.

A number of strategies have been adopted, ranging from reliance on techniques such as "defensive driving", to sanding and to operating in protected manual mode on ATO metro lines. The Ebicab system allows drivers to input a "poor adhesion" rate when setting up the train for initialisation prior to entering service. Swiss railways use a special code of ETCS to achieve the same objective [Watson, 2003]. This issue must be addressed in respect of both technology and operating rules when introducing ATP.

Back-up Systems

The use of GSM-R radio for vital data transmission is still regarded throughout the railway industry as either "not fully proven" or "insufficiently reliable" for permanent, full-time operation. Railway administrations, both national and commercial, presently regard the use of radio transmission without a fixed block, visual line side signal back-up system as unacceptable from a reliability perspective. The questions raised about the reliability of GSM-R or GNSS technology and its availability might be answered by the use of two-tier systems or independent, parallel systems being used.

One of the main advantages of ETCS Levels 2/3 is that line-side signals can be removed and that a considerable rationalisation of line-side equipment can be achieved. This is expected to reduce installation and maintenance costs and to improve the life cycle costs. If back-up systems are retained, most of these benefits will be lost and costs will probably rise. This is likely to lead to failure to secure a business case for the viability of ETCS Levels 2/3 installations under existing cost/benefit analysis conditions. To overcome this problem, the reliability of the radio system must be improved and the methods for recovery from failures must be designed carefully to minimise loss of capacity.

In the meantime, experience with the Swiss trial of ETCS Level 2 shows that back-up line-side signalling system should be retained at least during the implementation and stabilisation phases of a project.

ATP Code Transmission

We have seen in the previous articles that the ATP signalling codes contained in the track circuits are transmitted to the train. They are detected by pick-up antennae (usually two) mounted on the leading end of the train under the driving cab.  This data is passed to an on-board decoding and safety processor. The permitted speed is checked against the actual speed and, if the permitted speed is exceeded, a brake application is initiated. In the more modern systems, distance-to-go data will be transmitted to the train as well. The data is also sent to a display in the cab which allows the driver of a manually driven train to respond and drive the train within the permitted speed range.

At the trackside, the signal aspects of the sections ahead are monitored and passed to the code generator for each block. The code generator sends the appropriate codes to the track circuit. The code is detected by the antennae on the train and passed to the on-board computer. As we have seen, the computer will check the actual speed of the train with the speed required by the code and will cause a brake application if the train speed is too high.



Arquivo 047 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The Beacon Transmission. Train 6458 now has permission to proceed into the platform and will soon start. Train 7786 is just entering the Down platform.

The above series of screen shots are representations of the sort of indications and train movements typically seen in modern control rooms.  Not all installations are designed the same way but the basic principles are the same.

One feature which is apparent with all signalling installations is the need to prepare detailed "control tables" which define the logic sequence required for each route.  Much of the work is now computerised but part of the signal engineer's work is to understand the type of operational problems seen here and apply it to the design and control of signalling.

In the examples so far, the ATP data from the track to the train is transmitted by using coded track circuits passing through the running rails. It is known as the "continuous" transmission system because data is passing to the train all the time. However, it does have its limitations. There are transmission losses over longer blocks and this reduces the effective length of a track circuit to about 350 metres. The equipment is also expensive and vulnerable to bad weather, electronic interference, damage, vandalism and theft. To overcome some of these drawbacks, a solution using intermittent transmission of data has been introduced. It uses electronic beacons placed at intervals along the track.

In the best known system, originally developed by Ericsson in Sweden and formerly marketed by Adtranz (now Bombardier), there are usually two beacons, a location beacon to tell the train where it is and a signalling beacon to give the status of the sections ahead. The beacons are sometimes referred to as "balises" after the French. Data processing and the other ATP functions are similar to the continuous transmission system.
A disadvantage of the beacon system is that once a train has received a message indicating a reduced speed or stop, it will retain that message until it has passed another beacon or has stopped. This means that if the block ahead is cleared before Train 2 reaches its stopping point and the signal changes to green, the train will still have the stop message and will stop, even though it doesn't have to. Why, might you ask, can't the driver cancel the stop message like he does when the train has stopped and the signal changes to green? If he could cancel the stop message while the train was moving, the system would be no better than the AWS with its cancel button. ATP is "vital" or "fail-safe" and must not allow human intervention to reduce its effectiveness. 

In reality, it will not move even then, since it requires the driver to reset the system to allow the train to be restarted. For this reason, this type of ATP is normally used on manually driven systems.
The intermittent updates. To avoid the situation of an unnecessary stop, an intermediate beacon maybe provided or, as shown here (right), an infill loop. This updates the train as it approaches the stopping point and will revoke the stop command if the signal has cleared. More than one intermediate beacon can be provided if necessary.




Arquivo 048 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

The Moving Block - The Theory. As signalling technology has developed, there have been many refinements to the block system but, in recent years, the emphasis has been on attempts to get rid of fixed blocks altogether. Getting rid of fixed blocks has the advantage that you can vary the distances between trains according to their actual speed and according their speeds in relation to each other. It’s rather like applying the freeway rules for speed separation - you don’t need to be a full speed braking distance from the car in front because he won’t stop dead. If you are moving at the same speed as he is, you could, in theory, travel immediately behind him and, when he brakes, you do. If you allow a few metres for reaction time to his brake lights and variations in braking performance, it works well. Although it only needs a few spectacular collisions on the freeways to disprove the theory for road traffic, in the more regulated world of the railway, although it could  not be applied without a full safe braking distance between trains, it has possibilities.

As long as each train is travelling at the same speed as the one in front and they all have the same braking capabilities, they can, in theory, run as close together as a few metres. Just allow some room for reaction time and small errors and trains could run as close together as 50 metres at 50 km/h. Well, that’s OK in theory but, in practice, it’s a different matter and, as yet, no one has taken moving block design this far and they are unlikely to do so in the near future. The recent ICE high speed accident in Germany where a train derailed, struck a bridge and stopped very quickly, effectively negates the safety value of the theoretical moving block system described above. This means that it is essential to maintain a safe braking distance between trains at all times.

What is worth doing, is making the the block locations and lengths consistent with train location and speed, i.e. making them movable rather than fixed. This flexibility requires radio transmission, sometimes called Communications Based Train Control (CBTC) or Transmission Based Signalling (TBS) rather than track circuit transmission, to detect the location, speed and direction of trains and to tell trains their permitted operating speed.

The Moving Block and Radio Transmission. On a moving block equipped railway, the line is usually divided into areas or regions, each area under the control of a computer and each with its own radio transmission system. Each train transmits its identity, location, direction and speed to the area computer which makes the necessary calculations for safe train separation and transmits this to the following train as shown here (left).

The radio link between each train and the area computer is continuous so the computer knows the location of all the trains in its area all the time. It transmits to each train the location of the train in front and gives it a braking curve to enable it to stop before it reaches that train. In effect, it is a dynamic distance-to-go system. This is Communications Based Train Control (CBTC).

One fixed block feature has been retained - the requirement for a full speed braking distance between trains. This ensures that, if the radio link is lost, the latest data retained on board the following train will cause it to stop before it reaches the preceding train. The freeway style vision of two trains moving at 50 km/h with 50 metres between them is a step too far into virtual reality for most operators.

The Moving Block - Location Updates. As we have seen, trains in a moving block system report their position continuously to the area computer by means of the train to wayside radio. Each train also confirms its own position on the ground from beacons, located at intervals along the track, which recalibrate the train’s position compared with the on-board, computerised line map.

Transferring a train from one area to another is also carried out by using the radio links and, additionally by a link between the two adjacent area computers. The areas overlap each other so, when a train first reaches the boundary of a new area, the computer of the first area contacts the computer of the second area and alerts it to listen for the new train’s signal.  It also tells the train to change its radio codes to match the new area. When the new area picks up the ID of the train it acknowledges the handover from the first area and the transfer is complete.

Another version of the moving block system has the location computers on the trains. Each train knows where it is in relation to all the other trains and sets its safe speeds using this data. It has the advantage that there is less wayside equipment required than with the off-train system but the amount of transmissions is much greater.



Arquivo 049 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/automatic-train-control.html

An Early Moving Block System

One system which claims the distinction of being the first moving block system is that marketed under the name Seltrac by Alcatel. It is used in Canada and on the Docklands Light Railway in London. It has the ingredients of moving transmission of data, but the transmission medium is the track-mounted induction loops which are laid between the rails and which cross every 25 metres to allow trains to verify their position. Data is passed between the vehicle on-board computer (VOBC) and the vehicle control centre (VCC) through the loops. The VCC controls the speed of Train 2 by checking the position of Train 1 and calculating its safe braking curve. More detail on this system is here

The Seltrac system requires no driver, as it is fully automatic. In case of a system failure where a train has to be manually driven, it has axle counters to verify the position of a train not under the control of the loops. Perhaps its biggest drawback is the need for continuous cables to be laid within the tracks, expensive to install and open to damage during track maintenance.  

The principle difference between this system and the more modern ones being marketed today is that Seltrac uses electro-magnetic transmission of data requiring track cables, whereas radio based systems only require aerials. Seltrac is upgrading their design to use radio based transmission.

Moving Block - Why Do We Need It?

Railway signalling has traditionally required a large amount of expensive hardware to be distributed all along a route which is exposed to variable climatic conditions, wear, vandalism, theft and heavy usage. Because of the widely spaced distribution, maintenance is expensive and often restricted to times when trains are not running. Failures are difficult to locate and difficult to reach. On metros, access is further restricted where there are tunnels and elevated sections.   For these reasons, railway operators have been trying to reduce the wayside signalling equipment and so reduce maintenance costs.  Reduced wayside equipment can also lead to reduced installation costs. Moving block requires less wayside equipment than fixed block systems.

There is another goal much sought after by operators - greater capacity. A norm for most metro lines is 30 trains per hour (tph) or a two-minute headway. It is debatable whether much improvement on this is possible for a high capacity system, since the major losses of line capacity occur because of station stops and terminal operations. Heavily used metro lines, like those in Hong Kong, trying for a greater capacity than 30 trains per hour, will struggle to keep dwell times below 40-50 seconds at peak times. This will push the headway to two minutes or longer, regardless of the signalling system used. Similar problems exist at terminals where crossover clearance times are critical.  Moving block signalling cannot provide much improvement. Shorter headways can, however, be achieved on systems where trains are shorter, speeds lower and the passenger levels smaller. In some places a 95 second headway can be achieved on systems like Docklands and certain sections of the Paris Metro.

Also, for underground lines, modern ventilation and smoke control systems will require train separation of 2-300 metres to allow air circulation at critical times. If moving block signalling allows 50 metre separation, some very expensive additional ventilation arrangements might be necessary. This may reduce the benefits of moving block.

The real prize which could be won by an operator using moving block is reduced wayside equipment and reduced maintenance costs. Better reliability and quicker fault location is also possible with moving block technology. If radio based transmission is included, an all-round improvement can be achieved.

One other factor to be noted is that many operators specifying moving block technology also ask for fixed block track circuits to serve as a back up and for broken rail detection. Track circuits are also still required for junctions.   One might ask, if such equipment is to be installed anyway, why add the expense of radio-based transmission?





Arquivo 050 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/single-line-operation.html

Many railways around the world have more single track line than multiple track, so single line operation plays an important part in everyday train working and signalling practices.  The normal practice is to provide a single line with passing loops or short double track sections to give trains running in opposite directions places where they can pass.  This page gives an overview of the operation of trains over a single line and covers both US and UK practice. 

One Engine In Steam

The simplest form of single line operation is where the line has only one train - so called "one engine in steam" operation.  This is usually only practicable on a short branch line where the volume of traffic is low enough not to require more than one train.  The entrance to the line is protected by a locked manual ground lever frame or remotely controlled track circuited block.  In the UK, a "staff" or "token" may be issued to the driver as authority to proceed on to the single line.
Single Line Operation in the US

Many railways around the world are operated where trains work in either direction over a single line.  Trains running in opposing directions pass each other at places where loops or sidings are available.  Obviously, special, and somewhat elaborate precautions are used to prevent head-on collisions, or "cornfield meets" as they are called in the US.  
The principal difference between UK and US operation of single lines is that the UK uses lineside signals whereas, over large sections of the country, the US does not.  This is changing as more and more US lines come under centralised signalling control known as CTC (Centralised Traffic Control) but there are still huge areas of "dark territory", as it is called, which have no fixed signals.  For these areas, special rules are required and they have developed, over the years, into a complex system of train dispatching called "timetable and train order" operation.

The Timetable

The basic authority for train movements over a single line in the US is the timetable. It is used as the first level of regulation for all trains.   The timing and priority for trains is laid down in the timetable, i.e. the timetable dictates the departure times and then, if times cannot be adhered to, which train should move first and which should wait for others.  There is normally a set of rules of priority, e.g. "superiority by direction" where trains going in one direction, say westbound, have precedence over trains going eastbound.  In such a case, an eastbound train which arrives at a passing loop will always have to wait in the loop until a westbound train or trains has passed.  Different types of trains are also given priority, passenger over freight, for example.  Dispatchers, who are responsible for the movement of trains, always try to conform to the timetable first before issuing a train movement order.





Arquivo 051 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/single-line-operation.html

Train Speed Rules (US)

In the US, train speeds are regulated by law according to the signalling and automatic train protection (ATP) system provided.  Trains are only allowed to run at 80 mph and over if ATP is provided in some form.  Trains are restricted to below 59 mph (passenger) and below 49 mph (freight) in "dark territory", i.e where there are no signals.  See also US Railroad Signalling.

Train Spacing

There will often be circumstances where one train will be required to follow another in the same direction.  Without signals, this can be hazardous unless certain rules are followed.  In the UK, single line sections are comparatively short and are protected at each end by signalling but, in the US, they can be very long and without signals.  In the US, trains following one another over an unsignalled single line are only separated by time interval.

The normal time interval is five minutes between trains dispatched from a station.  If the train fails to keep to the normal speed for that section, the conductor or "flagman" will drop a flare (called a fusee) with a five minute burn time.  The following train is not allowed to pass this flare while it is still alight.  If his train stops, the rear conductor has to protect the train by walking back a safe braking distance and laying detonators (called torpedoes in the US) and showing a red flag or light to following trains.  This is similar to the emergency protection used in the UK.

Train Orders

Time interval operation is not used in isolation.  The basic form of authority for single line operation is the Train Order. This is a written instruction passed to the train crew which tells them they may pass onto the specified single line section and proceed along it until its end or a loop or siding is reached.  Once there, the Train Order will indicate whether they must wait for a new order or wait until a train running in the opposite direction has passed before they can proceed further.  Train Orders have formed the basis for train movement control in North America since the 1850s.

Train Orders were traditionally always issued as a written paper which was handed to the crew.  Dispatchers were in charge of issuing TOs since they has the overall picture of the section of line under their control.  Communications between dispatchers were originally by electric telegraph using Morse code.  Later, telephones became the standard method.  If orders were changed along the line, a train could be stopped at a station by a manually operated fixed signal.  This signal was only an indication to the driver that he should stop and collect a new TO.  

Track Warrants

In recent times, radio has become the standard method of issuing train orders.  Instructions are passed to crews by radio and the driver copies his instructions onto a special sheet called a Track Warrant.  
The driver will repeat back the message to the dispatcher to ensure the message has been properly understood.  This elaborate system is essential to ensure that the correct messages are received and understood by the designated crew.  A summary of how the system works is as follows.



Arquivo 052 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/single-line-operation.html

The Unsignalled Operations in the US. The system used on most unsignalled lines in the US is called the Dispatcher Control System or DCS.  An unsignalled line is broken up into blocks which can be up to 20 miles long.  Each block has a Block Limit Station (BLS) at each end.  A BLS consists of a simple fixed sign with the name of the BLS on it.  Block Limit Stations are usually located away from sidings so that any shunting can be done within the limits of a single block.

Train operation is controlled by a dispatcher.  The dispatcher will issue a track warrant called a "Form D" (on many lines, some call it by other names) to the train over the radio.  This will be his authority to proceed.  The Form D tells the train which blocks it can be in.  

If a "meet" is set up (i.e. trains have to pass each other) the dispatcher will order one train into a loop (called a siding in the US) and, once the crew calls in via radio that they are clear of the main line and hence out of the block, he will issue a Form D to the other train.  

If another train needs to follow the first, the dispatcher may instruct the first train to call in via radio each time it passes a BLS.  In this way the dispatcher knows which blocks are occupied and, therefore, where trains can run safely.  To keep the trains a safe distance apart, the dispatcher will either use time delay at each BLS or will issue a Form D to the lead train and a separate Form D to the following train at each BLS.  

Sometimes, lines which have signalling need to use the Dispatcher Controlled System (DCS), for example, wrong way running being required on single direction, automatically signalled tracks.

An alternative description of the use of track warrants is at a useful page called Track Warrant Control.

The Centralised Traffic Control (CTC). The more heavily used single lines are nowadays signalled and remotely controlled from a central location.  Track Warrants are largely unnecessary.  The signalling is based on track circuits and often allows long single line sections to be broken up into blocks, each protected by a signal at each end.  More than one train can proceed in the same direction, fully protected by automatic signalling.

The Single Line Operation (UK). In the UK, single line sections were generally short and were normally controlled by signalmen.  Under manual operation, trains were admitted to the single line once the signalman at its entrance had confirmed with the signalman at the exit that the previous train had cleared the other end.  Various systems were used and many can still be seen on local or preserved lines today.

The Staff and Ticket System. The original process for single line operation was known as the "staff and ticket" system.  Authority to enter the single line was by the signalman at the entrance giving the driver a "staff", a rod of wood or metal, on which the name of the single line was stamped.  When the train arrived at the other end of the single line, the staff was given up to allow a train to proceed in the opposite direction.  

If more than one train was required to follow consecutively  in the same direction, the first and subsequent trains were given a "ticket", which was analogous to the US train order.  It detailed the train information and the section over which it was allowed to pass.  When the ticket was issued, the staff was also shown to each driver as a guarantee that the issue was OK.  The staff was carried by the last train of the batch going in that direction.

The Electric Token Block. From the late 1880s, various forms of electrically interlocked, single line token systems were introduced.  The signal box at each end of the section was equipped with a "token instrument".  This was a machine which detected the removal or replacement of a "staff" or "token".  The token was a metal key which was smaller than a staff but which performed the same function.  The token instruments at each end of a single line section were electrically interlocked so that the act of removing a token locked both machines and prevented further removals from either instrument until the missing token was replaced at one end or the other.  To allow the passage of two or more consecutive trains in the same direction, the system used more than one token.  In effect, the "staff" and "tickets" now became a set of metal tokens.  In some systems, a set of "staffs" were used as tokens.  

It worked like this:  The signalbox at each end of the line had lots of tokens.  They were stored in the token instrument.  A token for authority for passage along a single line could only be removed by the signalman at the departure end if the signalman at the receiving end pressed a plunger which released the token on the departure end instrument. When the token was removed from the instrument at the departure end, the instruments at both ends became locked.  Both remained locked until the token was replaced in the receiving end instrument.  If a second train had to follow the first, a second token was released by the receiving end signalman as before and removed from the departure end, locking both instruments again until it was inserted in the instrument at the other end. Because it was a system relying on electric locking it was called the electric token system.

The next evolution was called "tokenless block" working, where the signals at each end of the single line were themselves electrically interlocked.  The signalman could not clear any signals protecting the entrance to the single line as long as the signals at the other end had admitted a train.  A direction lever was provided at each end and they had to match each other to enforce the locking.

The Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB). The development of modern electronics and "vital" or secure radio transmission systems has allowed railways to develop more cost effective signalling.  In rural areas of the UK, where long sections of single line require token block operation, a system for centralised control, using modern computer technology, was adopted.  It is known as Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB).





Arquivo 053 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/us-railroad-signalling.html

On railways all over the world, signals are used to indicate to the driver (engineer in the US) of a train how they should proceed. The way this is done in the US (and most of Europe except Spain and Norway) is quite different compared with the UK. In the UK (and other countries using UK based systems), signals are designed to show the driver the state of the road ahead. For example, a signal will show that the line is clear ahead and will also say how far ahead it is clear. The driver, using his knowledge of the line and of the train he is controlling, will make a judgement about how fast he can safely let his train go and will proceed accordingly. In the US, signals show engineers the speeds they are allowed to go. This is known as speed control signalling. They do not actually need to know how far ahead the line is clear. The speed they are allowed to do will depend on the type of train the driver is controlling.
ABS and Interlockings
In the US, like the UK, signals are classified into two general types. In the UK they are referred to as automatic and controlled, in the US they are known as Automatic Block Signals (ABS) and Interlocking Signals respectively. The two classifications are similar in that automatic signals work without manual controls while controlled or interlocking signals usually cover junction areas and require some form of additional controls operated by a signal tower (signal box in UK) or control room.

Overlap or Safety Block
Another feature of US railroad signals is that they do not have the 200 yard overlaps that are normal in the UK. The usual method of providing a safety margin beyond a stop signal in the US is to allocate the whole of the next block as the overlap. This is similar to the principle adopted on metros which use ATP.



Arquivo 054 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/us-railroad-signalling.html

Bi-Directional Signalling
Many US lines are equipped with full bi-directional signalling.  You will often see a block boundary with two signals, one facing in each direction.  The signalling operates exactly the same, regardless of the direction of running.

ATS, ATC, CSS
Any operator in the US who wants to run trains over 79 mi/hr has to have some sort of automatic train stop (ATS), automatic train control (ATC) or cab signalling system (CSS). These names all mean that the driver gets some type of in-cab indication and a warning of signal conditions. There are basically two systems; those which provide a warning like the UK AWS and those which regulate speed, like an ATP system.

Dark Territory
In the US, there are still large sections of lines which have no signals. This is almost unheard of in Europe because train traffic is normally a lot more dense. In the US, the unsignalled lines are usually long, single line sections in remote areas and there are thousands of miles of them. They are commonly referred to as dark territory. Trains are permitted to pass from one area to another by the use of train orders or track warrants, nowadays transmitted by radio between dispatchers and train crews.  Passing loops, called sidings in the US, usually form the boundaries between areas. There are elaborate rules for ensuring safety and accidents are rare.

Single lines with Signals
Some single line sections in the US are equipped with ABS (automatic block signals) to allow two or more trains to follow each other closely along the single line between sidings. The signals are provided for both directions as shown in the diagram below.  Often, the entrances to sidings are not controlled by interlocking signals and turnouts for sidings (passing loops) are hand operated.
There are no signals protecting the entrance to the signal line. The crew will be given authority by Track Warrant over the radio to enter the single line and then they will observe signals. The reason for this type of operation is to allow more than one train to proceed along the single line. Without the signals, successive trains have to follow by time interval, a rule still used in North America but which has not been allowed in the UK for over 100 years.

The next diagram shows the sequence of signals as two westbound (WB) trains pass through the single line section.  The signal indications are similar in meaning to the British "stop, caution or distant and clear" indications.


Arquivo 055 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/us-railroad-signalling.html

On single lines in the US, it is not unusual for sidings to be equipped with hand operated turnouts (points), even if the line is equipped with automatic signals.  This means that the driver of a train approaching a siding has to stop his train, even if the signal is showing a "proceed" aspect, and operate the turnout by hand to enter the siding.

Some sidings have spring loaded turnouts which are set to ensure that trains from opposite directions enter a different track without the crew having to stop and set the turnout by hand.

Operating Philosophy
In the UK, trains have been regulated by fixed signals since shortly after railways were first opened in the early 19th century. In the US, signals were the exception rather than the rule and many railways' rulebooks reflect this in their treatment of the rules.  Signals were (and still are in some places) regarded as an adjunct to the railway rather than part of it. With this in mind, we can now look at US signalling in general.

US Signal Layouts
A train passing along a signalled route will see an arrangement of signals which will appear somewhat as described in the following paragraphs.  Every 2 miles or so the train will pass an Automatic Block Signal (ABS).  All ABS signals for all tracks and both directions are located right next to the block entrance at the insulated rail joint (IRJ).  So, as the engineer (driver) passes from block to block its almost like passing through a pane of glass.  This is enhanced by the fact that for the most part there isn't much along the wayside but at a block limit the engineer will see signals, relay boxes and rail joints. 

OK, the engineer is passing block after block and all the signals have one head but then he gets to a block limit where the signal in his direction has two heads. These are the distant signals for an interlocking. They are still automatic and still retain a number plate that identifies them as automatic. Interlocking signals do not have number plates. After proceeding a little farther down the line the engineer reaches the interlocking entrance.  Across all tracks, in his direction only, is a line of signals. These signals have two or three heads and no number plate, which identifies them as absolute (stop) signals. If there is a proceed indication, the train crosses the boundary defined by the IRJ and signals and enters the interlocking. The train then passes over the points, it passes the signal tower or relay shed, perhaps passing over some more points and then reaches the "exit" signals. The exit signals actually have no bearing on this train whatsoever because they are all facing the opposite direction for incoming trains. 

The entrance signals not only govern the interlocking, but also the next block. However the exit signals and associated IRJ define another boundary and, after the train completely passes this boundary, is it out of the interlocking, free of dispatcher control and under automatic signal rules. Note that, while any part of the train is between the Home (entrance and exit) signals, it is working under interlocking rules. Once it crosses the boundary defined by the Home signals it is under Rule 251 or 261 operation.

The train continues on to complete the same steps through each interlocking. Every so often a train will pass from one interlocking right into another (some interlockings also have sub interlockings that are completely independent). The first ABS limit the train reaches will be the distant for operation in the other direction.

Precedence
In the US, trains are given what is referred to as "precedence". This means that each type of train has a "pecking order" in terms of priority of movement. Precedence is determined first by the timetable, then by the type of train and then by direction.  Different railroads have their own precedence rules but the principles are the same.

Train Orders and Track Warrants
The foundation of US railroad signalling philosophy is single line operation without fixed signals. Signalling was only introduced for sections of line which had too many trains to handle under manual rules or where there were junctions. Trains are handled by Train Orders or Track Warrants. An explanation of the train order and track warrant process is available on the single line operation page.

Signalling Commands
The US Automatic Block Signal (ABS), i.e. one without any manual control and operated by trains passing through track circuits, shows four basic commands. The way the signal displays the commands, in other words the aspect, varies from railroad to railroad and often from division to division in a railroad. There are also variations in the meanings of signals which appear to look the same. The basic commands, however, are:

Stop, Approach, Approach Limited and Clear.

The US has the "stop and proceed" signal system seen in the UK but it is referred to as a "permissive" signal. The driver is told, "You are allowed to pass this signal after stopping but you must proceed at a speed which allows you to stop your train in half the available sighting distance." There are some stop signals at interlockings (therefore they are not ABS) where it is forbidden to pass and these are called "absolute stop" signals. They invariably show a different display to the permissive stop signal and it normally includes two red lights.

As US signals are speed limiting, a signal displaying "Approach" means the equivalent of the UK single yellow - "be prepared to stop at the next signal" but, additionally, the US rule says, "also keep your train speed down to less than 30 mi/h (often less for freight)". "Approach limited" (UK = double yellow) would mean "you should be doing 30 by the time you get to the next signal but not more than 45 mi/h now".

In the US also, there are four common terms used to instruct crews about permitted train speeds as follows:

Slow = 15mi/h

Medium = 30 mi/h

Limited = 45 mi/h

Restricted = 15mi/h within an interlocking or 20 mi/h outside it or the speed which allows you to stop within half sighting distance. It is the speed you are allowed to do if you have passed a red permissive signal.

Some of the speeds may be lower for freight trains. 

The fundamental purpose for US signal indications is to inform the engineer of the approaching train of the speed rule that he must apply to his train’s movement. There is a list of the signalling rules applied to most railroads in North America at NORAC Signal Aspects.  It shows each signal display and the rules appertaining to that display. Most rules have a number of different signals according to the original railroad company rules, the highest range being fifteen. 




Arquivo 056 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/us-railroad-signalling.html

The Interlocking Signals. Interlocking signals in the US represent the UK "controlled" signal; i.e. one that is controlled from a signal tower (cabin in UK) or any sort of control room. Interlocking signals offer a great variety of signal displays and commands which can be confusing. In addition to signals showing what speed you are allowed to do because of the route which is set for you, there are some which indicate a speed restriction "within interlocking limits”. The term interlocking is now creeping into UK parlance.

A sample series of commands looks like this:  (Note that the commands are all speed related and they cover AB signals as well.)

Clear - Proceed at normal speed for your train, you will get the straight route ahead.

Approach - Be prepared to stop at the next signal and reduce train speed to 30 mi/h

Approach Slow - Be prepared to stop at the next signal but approach it at slow speed (15 mi/h); usually because of passing through a crossover.

Advance Approach Medium - Proceed but approach second signal ahead at medium speed (30 mi/h)

Approach Medium - Proceed but approach next signal ahead at medium speed (30 mi/h)

Approach Limited - Proceed but approach next signal ahead at limited speed (45 mi/h)

Limited Clear - Proceed but at limited speed (45 mi/h) within interlocking limits

Medium Clear - Proceed but at medium speed (30 mi/h) within interlocking limits

Slow Clear - Proceed but at slow speed (15 mi/h) within interlocking limits

There are some variations for different railroads but the range of speeds is similar.

"Approach"

It is worth adding a few notes here about the use of the word "approach" and how it is applied to US signals. Approach is the US term which would be known as "caution" in the UK. Approach Medium, Approach Limited and Advance Approach are all commonly used to describe certain types of signal commands in the US. There are basically three types of Approach signals: "Approach ...........", "............ Approach" and just plain "Approach". 

Approach tells you how fast you have to be going by the next signal only. Except in the case of Approach Slow, they say nothing about how fast you can go before the next signal. Also an "Approach ..........." signal informs the driver that the next signal is not at Stop but also not at full Clear. For the interests of safety, trains with ATC are limited to 45 mph or less after passing any type of "Approach ..........." signal but, going by the letter of the rules, the driver must only be doing the proscribed speed by the next signal. Furthermore, while trains with ATC are limited to 45 mph after passing both an Approach Medium or an Approach Limited, trains which pass an Approach Medium must slow to 30 mph by the end of the block, while trains which pass an Approach Limited can continue to travel at speeds up to 45 mph.

A "............ Approach" signal tells the engineer to reduce speed at once and then to expect a stop signal. In the case of Medium Approach the driver must begin to reduce to medium speed as soon as the Medium Approach signal becomes visible. This also serves as an informal overlap.

A simple Approach signal tells the driver to expect stop in one or two blocks and proscribes an immediate speed reduction.  Advance Approach and Approach Medium or Limited are not always used interchangeably. Approach M/L makes use of signals with two or more "heads" but if you want to install three-block protection then it's easier to use Advance Approach. 

Advance Approach proscribes a speed limit of 45 mph while Approach M/L doesn't. Approach M/L implies non-stopping signals ahead while Advance Approach implies the second signal is red.  In the US, with huge freight trains the engineers really need plenty of time to prepare to stop and therefore they need signals that give them warning of a stop and others that warn them of a required slow-down. 

"Approach ..........." signals are most often used to indicate that a train will be taking some form of diverging route at an interlocking. Advance Approach signals warn of a stop in two blocks, Approach warns of a ABS (permissive) stop at the next signal and Medium Approach warns of an absolute stop at the next signal.

Types of Signals
As we have seen, there is a wide variety of signals in the US. Each R. R. originally had its own system but now, due to mergers, take-overs and split-ups, you can expect to find a mix of signals on any system. A good explanation of the different types is provided by Douglas A. Kerr in his site Rail Signal Aspects and Indications.



Arquivo 057 - http://www.railway-technical.com/signalling/us-railroad-signalling.html


The Imposition of ATS/ATC

The US uses automatic train stop (ATS) or automatic train control (ATC) on busy lines or where higher speeds are required.  ATS is similar to the UK AWS, while ATC is a form of automatic train protection (ATP), as it is called in the UK.  In 1922, the US Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) told railroads that it wanted them to install some sort of ATS or ATC on hi-speed lines as a safety precaution. The ICC made no regulations at first but it warned that it would do so in the future. Initially, several companies began to build ATS/ATC systems but then the depression of the 1930s, followed by WW2, slowed development. In 1951, the ICC made good on its word and mandated a nationwide 79 mi/h speed limit on any track not equipped with some sort of ATC/ATS. By this time many Americans had bought cars and given up on train travel so a number of railroad companies felt that ATS/ATC was not worth it and just accepted the speed limit but there were a few notable exceptions. These included the Pennsylvania R. R., which was a firm believer in safety systems.

The 79 mi/h speed limit is still in effect, although on some lines in the western US Amtrak has received permission to go up to 90 mi/h.  On the east coast it is illegal for any non-CSS (Cab Signalling System) equipped train to run on CSS territory. 

Types of ATS/ATC
ATS operates from track mounted inductors.  At the first restrictive signal, the inductor acts to operate a warning noise for the driver who has a few seconds to acknowledge it and start braking the train or there is an automatic brake application.  The system is sometimes used with cab signalling (called CSS), where the signal displays are shown in the cab.  This requires a continuous track to train transmission system.  On some lines equipped with cab signalling, there are no wayside signals.

ATC requires continuous track to train transmission since the speed of the train is being constantly monitored and cab signal displayed to the driver.  If speed limits required by the signal displays are not adhered to, the ATC system will apply the brakes.  ATC also operates over lines which are not equipped with wayside signals.

Here's how the system works:  As a train passes signal A at the start of the block, a CSS coder at the end of the block sends the CSS code into a rail.   The code consists of pulses of 100 Hz AC, 180 pulses for Clear, 120 for Approach Limited, 75 for Approach and 0 for Restricting or Stop. 

The largest user of ATC with cab signal and with wayside signals was the Pennsylvania R.R. (PRR).  The PRR had always been a leader in safety and was one of the first RRs with air brakes and knuckle couplers as standard.  In the 1920s the PRR was busy electrifying and replacing old semaphore signals with yellow position light signals.  They listened to the ICC and decided to install a Cab Signalling System on all main routes.  This grew to include over 1100 route and 3000 track miles.




Arquivo 058 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

Electric motors are a common means of powering a train, whether the energy required is carried on-board the train in the form of a diesel engine and its fuel or obtained from outside the train by connection with an external power supply carried by an overhead line or third rail. Electric traction is widely used around the world, particularly for routes with dense traffic, like urban and suburban railways or long distance, high speed lines that need electric traction to obtain the speeds required for inter-city travel. There are a number of different systems of electric traction and these are described here.
Historically, the DC motor was the mainstay of electric traction drives on both electric and diesel-electric rolling stock. Many examples are still in use around the world. The motor consists of two parts, a rotating armature and a fixed field (Figure 1). The fixed field consists of tightly wound coils of wire fitted inside the motor case.  The armature is another set of coils wound round a central shaft.  It is connected  to the field through "brushes" which are spring loaded contacts pressing against an extension of the armature called the commutator.  The commutator collects all the terminations of the armature coils and distributes them in a circular pattern to allow the correct sequence of current flow. 
The DC motor works because, simply put, when a current is passed through the motor circuit, there is a reaction between the current in the field and the current in the armature which causes the armature to turn. The armature and the field are connected in series and the whole motor is referred to as "series wound".

A series wound DC motor has a low resistance field and armature circuit. Because of this, when voltage is applied to it, the current is high (Ohms Law: current = voltage/resistance). The advantage of high current is that the magnetic fields inside the motor are strong, producing high torque (turning force), so it is ideal for starting a heavy object like a train. The disadvantage is that the current flowing into the motor has to be limited somehow, otherwise the supply could be overloaded and/or the motor and its cabling could be damaged. At best, the torque would exceed the adhesion and the driving wheels would slip. Traditionally, resistors were used to limit the initial current.



Arquivo 059 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

DC control circuit

As the DC motor starts to turn, the interaction of the magnetic fields inside it causes it to generate a voltage internally. This "back voltage" opposes the applied voltage and the current that flows is governed by the difference between the two. So, as the motor speeds up, the internally generated voltage rises, the effective voltage falls, less current is forced through the motor and thus the torque falls. The motor naturally stops accelerating when the drag of the train matches the torque produced by the motors. To continue accelerating the train, resistors are switched out in steps, each step increasing the effective voltage and thus the current and torque for a little bit longer until the motor catches up. This can be heard and felt in older DC trains as a series of clunks under the floor, each accompanied by a jerk of acceleration as the torque suddenly increases in response to the new surge of current. When no resistor is left in the circuit, the full line voltage is applied directly to the motor. The train's speed remains constant at the point where the torque of the motor, governed by the effective voltage, equals the drag - sometimes referred to as balancing speed.  If the train starts to climb a grade, the speed reduces because drag is greater than torque.  But the reduction in speed causes the back voltage to decline and thus the effective voltage rises - until the current forced through the motor produces enough torque to match the new drag.
On an electric train, the driver originally had to control the cutting out of resistance manually but, by the beginning of the First World War in 1914, automatic acceleration was being used on multiple-unit trains. This was achieved by an accelerating relay (often called a "notching relay") in the motor circuit which monitored the fall of current as each step of resistance was cut out. All the driver had to do was select low, medium or full speed (called "shunt", "series" and "parallel" from the way the motors were connected in the resistance circuit) and the equipment would do the rest.
Motor Control and Protection
As described above, DC motors are controlled by a "notching relay" set into the power circuit (Figure 3).  But there are other relays provided for motor protection.  Sharp spikes of current will quickly damage a DC motor so protective equipment is provided in the form of an "overload relay", which detects excessive current in the circuit and, when it occurs, switches off the power to avoid damage to the motors.  Power is switched off by means of Line Breakers, one or two heavy-duty switches similar to circuit breakers which are remotely controlled. They would normally be opened or closed by the action of the driver's controller but they can also be opened automatically by the action of the overload relay.

A further protective device is also provided in the classic DC motor control circuit. This is the "no-volt" relay, which detects power lost for any reason and makes sure that the control sequence is returned to the starting point (i.e. all the resistances are restored to the power circuit) before power could be re-applied. This is necessary to ensure that too much current is not applied to a motor which lost speed while current was off.


Arquivo 060 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

AC and DC Motors
Both AC (Alternating Current) and DC motors have the same basic structure but there are differences and, for various reasons, the DC motor was originally the preferred form of motor for railway applications and most systems used it. Nowadays, modern power electronics has allowed the use of AC motors and, for most new equipments built today, the AC motor is the type used. 

Often, people ask about the differences between AC and DC motors as used in locomotives and multiple-units.  In the early days of electric traction at the beginning of this century both types were tried. The limits of the technology at the time favoured the DC motor. It provided the right torque characteristic for railway operation and was reasonably simple to control.

By the early 1980s, power electronics had progressed to the stage where the 3-phase AC motor had become a serious and more efficient alternative to the DC motor because:

 They are simpler to construct, they require no mechanical contacts to work (such as brushes) and they are lighter than DC motors for equivalent power.
 Modern electronics allow AC motors to be controlled effectively to improve both adhesion and traction.

 AC motors can be microprocessor controlled to a fine degree and can regenerate current down to almost a stop whereas DC regeneration fades quickly at low speeds.

They are more robust and easier to maintain than DC motors.

This type of motor is commonly called the Asynchronous Motor and was often referred to as the squirrel cage motor on account of its early design form.  Both AC and DC motors are similar to look at externally but there are differences in construction, particularly because the DC motor has a commutator and brushes which the AC motor does not. 

Nose Suspended Motor
In electric trains or locomotives, the DC motor was traditionally mounted in the bogie frame supported partially by the axle which it drove and partially by the bogie frame. The motor case was provided with a "nose" which rested on a bracket fixed to the transom of the bogie.  It was called a "nose suspended motor" (see the Bogies page for a diagram) and is still common around the world. Its main disadvantage is that part of the weight rests on the axle and is therefore unsprung.  This leads to greater wear on bogie and track. Nowadays, designers try to ensure all the motor weight is sprung by ensuring it is carried entirely by the bogie frame - a frame mounted motor.

Quill Drive
A quill is described in the dictionary as, "the hollow stem of a feather" and "a bobbin or spindle", as well as a "feather" and, alternatively, what a porcupine has on its back. In railway traction terms, a quill drive is where a hollow shaft is placed round the driving axle and the motor drives the quill rather than driving the axle as it does with a nose suspended drive. The quill itself is attached, at one end, to one of the wheels by means of rubber bushed links and, at the other end, to the gearwheel by similar links. The big advantage of such drives is that all the weight of the motor is carried in the bogie frame (so it is a frame mounted motor) instead of it being directly supported by the axle and therefore partially unsprung.
In German the quill is called "Hohlwelle" (hollow shaft) and used in the ICE1 and ICE2 as well as the electric locomotive Class 101. (Source Tobias Benjamin Koehler 19 Oct 98).




Arquivo 061 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

Monomotor Bogie
As its name implies, the monomotor bogie has a single motor which drives both axles. The design is much favoured by French engineering, where it was introduced in the 1950s for the rubber tyred train concept.  The motor is mounted longitudinally in the centre of the bogie and drives each axle through a differential gearbox, similar to a road vehicle. The differential gears are required to compensate for the operation of the rubber tyres round curves. It requires a special bogie frame construction to accommodate the motor.

To accommodate a rubber tyred train, the standard railway track has to have concrete strips laid on the outside of the conventional rails and additional vertical steel guide rails on the outside of those. The steel guide rails act as positive and negative traction current rails.
Linear Motor
Another form of traction used on some urban railways is the linear motor. The principal, compared with a standard motor, is shown here. This simple diagram shows the principal of the linear motor. The conventional DC motor consists of a fixed part (the stator) and a moving part (the rotor). Both parts are contained in a case on the train and the rotor is connected to the axle by a pinion/gear arrangement.  When the armature turns, the wheel turns.

For the linear motor, the two parts are separated with one placed on the train and the other on the track. Both parts are unwrapped and they are swapped so that the fixed part of the DC motor becomes the moving part of the linear motor mounted on the train while the former moving part of the DC motor is fixed to the track. The electro-magnetic interaction between the current in the fixed part and that in the moving part causes the train to be drawn along the line. There is a very small air gap (about 10 mm) between the two parts as shown in this photo.

The efficiency of the linear motor is about 60% of the conventional motor but it has the advantage of less moving parts and it does not have the reliance on adhesion of the conventional motor.

Multiple Unit Control

Originally derived from lift operation over a hundred years ago, multiple unit (MU) control has become the most common form of train control in use around the world today.

Electric locomotives were originally designed so that the motors were controlled directly by the driver.  The traction power circuits passed through a large controller mounted in the driving cab.  A handle was rotated by the driver as necessary to change the switches in the circuit to increase or reduce power as required.  This arrangement meant that the driver had to remain close to the motors if long and heavy, power-carrying cables were to be avoided. 

While this arrangement worked well enough, the desire to get rapid turnrounds on city streetcar railways led to the adoption of remote control.  The idea was that, if the motors could be remotely controlled, a set of driver's controls could be placed at each end of the train.  It would not be necessary to have a locomotive added at the rear of an arriving train to allow it to make the return journey.  A cab would be installed at each end of the train and the driver just had to change ends to change direction.  Once this idea was established, it was realised that the motors could be placed anywhere along the train, with as many or as few as required to provide the performance desired.  With this development, more but smaller motors were scattered along the train instead of building a few large motors in a locomotive.   This is how the concept of motor cars and trailer cars evolved.  Trailer cars are just passenger carrying vehicles but motor cars are passenger carrying vehicles which have motors and their associated control equipment. 

Multiple unit trains, as these trains became known, were equipped with control cables called train lines, which connected the driver's controls with the motor controls and power switches on each motor car.  The opening and closing of the power switches was achieved by electro-magnetic relays, using principles originally designed for lifts.  While the idea was being established on passenger trains, it was also adopted on locomotives.  It quickly became the standard method of control.




Arquivo 062 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

The Relay
A relay is really a remotely controlled switch.  In Figure 6, a power circuit contains a switch which is opened and closed by operation of a relay.   The relay is activated by a magnetic core which is energised when a controlling switch is closed.  As the core is energised, it lifts and closes a pair of contacts in a second circuit - usually a power circuit.  The current required for the relay is usually much lower than that used for the power circuit so it can be provided by a battery. 
Applied to a simple lift operating between two levels, a control switch on each landing could use relays to switch on the lift motor to move the lift up or down.  On a train, the controlling switch could be located anywhere on the train to activate the relays controlling the power to the motors.  The same principles can be used to carry out any other switching e.g. for lights or heating.   It represents a safe and simple way of transmitting commands to a number of equipments in a train and it is the foundation upon which multiple unit control was based.  On modern rolling stock, the relay is being replaced in many applications by electronic control, which speeds operation, eliminates the mechanical movements required and allows the miniaturisation of control systems.

The Contactor
As we have seen from the description above, the relay must have a current applied to it all the time it is required to be closed.  To avoid having current on to, say, a lighting control relay all the time, a different type of remotely controlled switch is used.  This is called a contactor.

The contactor is really a latched relay.  It can also be called (in the US) a "momentary switch".  It only requires current to be on for a "moment" for it to operate.  In order to keep the contacts closed once the control current is lost, the power circuit contacts are held in position by a mechanical latch.  When it is necessary to open the power circuit, the latch is released and the contacts drop open.
Contactors are widely used on trains and, for us, are a good example to demonstrate how multiple unit control works in practice.





Arquivo 063 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

Multiple Unit Control
In a multiple unit system, sets of equipment along the train are controlled from one location. In Figure 8, all the lighting contactors on the train are connected to train wires, in this case one for “lights on” (in black) and one for “lights off” (in blue).  The ON and OFF buttons are in the driving cabs at each end of the train so, the lighting can be switched on or off from either end of the train.  

To prevent unauthorised use of the control buttons, most of the important circuits in the cab are isolated by a "control switch" or "cab on switch".  This is key operated and keys are only issued to qualified drivers or maintainers.  It also means that, in our example, lights can only be switched on or off from one end at a time.  The same principle, using contactors or relays, is applied to all other systems on the train - driving controls, braking control, heaters, doors, air conditioning, public address etc.

Of course, current for the equipment on each vehicle, as in this case, lighting, comes from a separate source - the auxiliary supplies - in the form of a battery, an alternator, an inverter or a power train line.

Forward and Reverse
How, one might ask, does one ensure that a number of locomotives or EMUs (or DMUs for that matter), coupled together to work in multiple, perhaps facing in different directions, will all respond to the driver's command to go in the same direction, say forward, from the cab where he is sitting?
Each power unit (whether it be a locomotive or EMU) has a forward wire and a reverse wire connected to a "Forward and Reverse" switch of one sort or another in the cab.  Looking at Unit 1, if the driver selects "Forward", the forward wire (in red) is energised and the "forward relay" (the arrow shows the direction of movement obtained for each relay) is energised to make the locomotive move in the forward direction.  

To ensure the correct direction is achieved by a second locomotive (Unit 2) that is coupled to the first, the forward and reverse wires are crossed over in the jumper cable.  If the second locomotive faces in the opposite direction to the first, its reverse wire (shown in black here) will be energised to make the loco run in the same direction as its partner.  To make sure this always happens, all multiple unit control jumpers have their forward and reverse wires crossed. 

But, you might ask, what if the locos both face in the same direction?  You don't need the crossed wires in the jumper.  The crossed wires in the jumper will make the second loco go the opposite way.  No, that's been solved too.  So that the same jumper with the crossed wires can be used anywhere, the forward and reverse wires are also crossed ON each locomotive, only at one end, usually near the jumper socket.  Now, no matter which way round the locos are coupled to each other, and in what order, the forward command will always make all units drive in the same direction and the reverse command will make all units drive in the opposite direction.

One final point.  The jumper heads are designed so that they can only be inserted one way into the coupler socket on the locomotive, rather like a USB plug on a computer.

Modern Control Systems
Modern systems use single wires or even fibre optic cables for controls. The system is sometimes referred to as "multiplexing", where a number of control signals are sent along a single wire. Some administrations require hard wired controls for safety systems like train braking but diverse programming can be used to make this redundant.

Series-Parallel Control
Although series-parallel connecting was common for resistance controlled DC traction motor control, it has been replaced for new equipment by electronic control. However, there are many series-parallel systems still in use around the world.
Field Weakening

The DC motor can be made to run faster than the basic "balancing speed" achieved whilst in the full parallel configuration without any resistance in circuit.  This is done by "field shunting".  An additional circuit is provided in the motor field to weaken the current flowing through the field.  The weakening is achieved by placing a resistance in parallel with the field.  This has the effect of forcing the armature to speed up to restore the balance between its magnetic filed and that being produced in the field coils.   It makes the train go faster.

Various stages of field weakening can be employed, according to the design of the motor and the intended purpose.  Some locomotives used as many as six steps of field weakening.

Regenerative Braking
Since the DC motor and a DC generator are virtually the same machine mechanically, it was immediately realised that a train could use its motors to act as generators and that this would provide some braking effect if a suitable way could be found to dispose of the energy. The idea formed that if the power could be returned to the source, other trains could use it. Trains were designed therefore, which could return current, generated during braking, to the supply system for use by other trains. Various schemes were tried over many years with more or less success but it was not until the adoption of modern electronics that reliable schemes have been available.


Arquivo 064 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html

The Rheostatic Braking. The major drawback with the regenerative braking system is that the line is not always able to accept the regenerated current.  Some railways had substations fitted with giant resistors to absorb regenerated current not used by trains but this was a complex and not always reliable solution. As each train already had resistors, it was a logical step to use these to dispose of the generated current. The result was rheostatic braking.  When the driver calls for brake, the power circuit connections to the motors are changed from their power configuration to a brake configuration and the resistors inserted into the motor circuit.  As the motor generated energy is dispersed in the resistors and the train speed slows, the resistors are switched out in steps, just as they are during acceleration. Rheostatic braking on a DC motored train can be continued down to less than 20 mph when the friction brakes are used to bring the train to a stop.

Before the advent of power electronics, there were some attempts to combine the two forms of what we now call "dynamic braking" so that the generated current would go to the power supply overhead line or third rail if it could be absorbed by other trains but diverted to on-board resistors if not.

In the case of diesel-electric locomotives, dynamic braking is restricted to the rheostatic type. Racks of resistors can often be seen on the roofs of heavy-haul locomotives for which dynamic braking is a big advantage on long downhill grades where speed must be maintained at a restricted level for long periods.

The AC and DC Differences. To understand the principles of modern traction power control systems, it is worth a look at the basics of DC and AC circuitry.  DC is direct current - it travels in one direction only along a conductor.  AC is alternating current - so called because it changes direction, flowing first one way along the conductor, then the other.  It does this very rapidly.  The number of times it changes direction per second is called the frequency and is measured in Hertz (Hz).  It used to be called cycles per second, in case you've read of this in historical papers.  In a diagrammatic representation, the two types of current appear as shown in the diagram above left.

From a transmission point of view, AC is better than DC because it can be distributed at high voltages over a small size conductor wire, whereas DC needs a large, heavy wire or, on many DC railways, an extra rail.  DC also needs more frequent feeder substations than AC - the ratio for a railway averages at about 8 to 1.  It varies widely from one application to another but this gives a rough idea.  See also Electric Traction Pages Power Supplies.

Over the hundred years or so since the introduction of electric traction on railways, the rule has generally been that AC is used for longer distances and main lines and DC for shorter, suburban or metro lines.  DC gets up to 3000 volts, while AC uses 15,000 - 50,000 volts.

Until recently, DC motors have been the preferred type for railways because their characteristics were just right for the job.  They were easy to control too.  For this reason, even trains powered from AC supplies were usually equipped with DC motors.

The AC Locomotives with DC Drives. This diagram (above) shows a simplified schematic for a 25 kV AC electric locomotive used in the UK from the late 1960s.  The 25 kV AC is collected by the pantograph and passed to the transformer.  The transformer is needed to step down the voltage to a level which can be managed by the traction motors.  The level of current applied to the motors is controlled by a "tap changer", which switches in more sections of the transformer to increase the voltage passing through to the motors.  It works in the same way as the resistance controllers used in DC traction, where the resistance contactors are controlled by a camshaft operating under the driver's commands.

Before being passed to the motors, the AC has to be changed to DC by passing it through a rectifier.  For the last 30 years, rectifiers have used diodes and their derivatives, the continuing development of which has led to the present, state-of-the-art AC traction systems.

The Diode. A diode is a device with no moving parts, known as a semi-conductor, which allows current to flow through it in one direction only.  It will block any current which tries to flow in the opposite direction. Four diodes arranged in a bridge configuration, as shown below, use this property to convert AC into DC or to "rectify" it.  It is called a "bridge rectifier".  Diodes quickly became popular for railway applications because they represent a low maintenance option. They first appeared in the late 1960s when diode rectifiers were introduced on 25 kV AC electric locomotives.


Arquivo 065 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html
The Thyristor. The thyristor is a development of the diode.  It acts like a diode in that it allows current to flow in only one direction but differs from the diode in that it will only permit the current to flow after it has been switched on or "gated".  Once it has been gated and the current is flowing, the only way it can be turned off is to send current in the opposite direction.  This cancels the original gating command.  It's simple to achieve on an AC locomotive because the current switches its direction during each cycle.  With this development, controllable rectifiers became possible and tap changers quickly became history.  A thyristor controlled version of the 25 kV AC electric locomotive traction system looks like the diagram here on the left.

A tapping is taken off the transformer for each DC motor and each has its own controlling thyristors and diodes.  The AC from the transformer is rectified to DC by chopping the cycles, so to speak, so that they appear in the raw as half cycles of AC as shown on the left.

In reality, a smoothing circuit is added to remove most of the "ripple" and provide a more constant power flow as shown in the diagram (left). Meanwhile, the power level for the motor is controlled by varying the point in each rectified cycle at which the thyristors are fired.  The later in the cycle the thyristor is gated, the lower the current available to the motor.  As the gating is advanced, so the amount of current increases until the thyristors are "on" for the full cycle.  This form of control is known as "phase angle control". 

The SEPEX. In more recent thyristor control systems, the motors themselves are wired differently from the old standard DC arrangement.  The armatures and fields are no longer wired in series, they are wired separately - separate excitement, or SEPEX.  Each field has its own thyristor, which is used to control the individual fields more precisely.

Since the motors are separately excited, the acceleration sequence is carried out in two stages.  In the first stage, the armature is fed current by its thyristors until it reaches the full voltage.  This might give about 25% of the locomotive's full speed.  In the second stage, the field thyristors are used to weaken the field current, forcing the motor to speed up to compensate.  This technique is known as field weakening and was already used in pre-electronic applications.

A big advantage of SEPEX is that wheel slip can be detected and corrected quickly, instead of the traditional method of either letting the wheels spin until the driver noticed or using a wheel slip relay to switch off the circuit and then restart it.

The DC Choppers. The traditional resistance control of DC motors wastes current because it is drawn from the line (overhead or third rail) and only some is used to accelerate the train to 20-25 mph when, at last, full voltage is applied.  The remainder is consumed in the resistances.  Immediately thyristors were shown to work for AC traction, everyone began looking for a way to use them on DC systems.  The problem was how to switch the thyristor off once it had been fired, in other words, how to get the reverse voltage to operate on an essentially one-way DC circuit.  It is done by adding a "resonant circuit" using an inductor and a capacitor to force current to flow in the opposite direction to normal.  This has the effect of switching off the thyristor, or "commutating" it.  It is shown as part of the complete DC thyristor control circuit diagram.  It has its own thyristor to switch it on when required.
Two other features of the DC thyristor circuit are the "freewheel diode" and the "line filter".  The freewheel diode keeps current circulating through the motor while the thyristor is off, using the motor's own electro magnetic inductance.   Without the diode circuit, the current build up for the motor would be slower.

Thyristor control can create a lot of electrical interference - with all that chopping, it's bound to. The "line filter" comprises a capacitor and an inductor and, as its name suggests, it is used to prevent interference from the train's power circuit getting into the supply system.

The thyristor in DC traction applications controls the current applied to the motor by chopping it into segments, small ones at the beginning of the acceleration process, gradually enlarging as speed increases.  This chopping of the circuit gave rise to the nickname "chopper control".  It is visually represented by the diagram below, where the "ON" time of the thyristor is regulated to control the average voltage in the motor circuit.   If the "ON" time is increased, so does the average voltage and the motor speeds up.  The system began to appear on UK EMUs during the 1980s.

The Dynamic Braking. Trains equipped with thyristor control can readily use dynamic braking, where the motors become generators and feed the resulting current into an on-board resistance (rheostatic braking) or back into the supply system (regenerative braking).  The circuits are reconfigured, usually by a "motor/brake switch" operated by a command from the driver, to allow the thyristors to control the current flow as the motors slow down.  An advantage of the thyristor control circuitry is its ability to choose either regenerative or rheostatic braking simply by automatically detecting the state of receptivity of the line.  So, when the regenerated voltage across the supply connection filter circuit reaches a preset upper limit, a thyristor fires to divert the current to the on-board resistor. 

The GTO Thyristor. By the late 1980s, the thyristor had been developed to a stage where it could be turned off by a control circuit as well as turned on by one.  This was the "gate turn off" or GTO thyristor.  This meant that the thyristor commutating circuit could be eliminated for DC fed power circuits, a saving on several electronic devices for each circuit.  Now thyristors could be turned on and off virtually at will and now a single thyristor could be used to control a DC motor.

It is at this point that the conventional DC motor reached its ultimate state in the railway traction industry. Most systems now being built use AC motors.

The AC Motors. There are two types of AC motor, synchronous and asynchronous.   The synchronous motor has its field coils mounted on the drive shaft and the armature coils in the housing, the inverse of normal practice.  The synchronous motor has been used in electric traction - the most well-known application being by the French in their TGV Atlantique train.  This used a 25 kV AC supply, rectified to DC and then inverted back to AC for supply to the motor.  It was designed before the GTO thyristor had been sufficiently developed for railway use and it used simple thyristors.  The advantage for the synchronous motor in this application is that the motor produces the reverse voltages needed to turn off the thyristors.  It was a good solution is its day but it was quickly overtaken by the second type of AC motor - the asynchronous motor - when GTO thyristors became available.




Arquivo 066 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/electric-traction-control-d.html
The Asynchronous Motor
The asynchronous motor, also called the induction motor, is an AC motor which comprises a rotor and a stator like the DC motor, but the AC motor does not need current to flow through the armature.  The current flowing in the field coils forces the rotor to turn.  However, it does have to have a three phase supply, i.e. one where AC has three conductors, each conducting at a point one third into the normal cycle period,
The two big advantages of the 3-phase design are that, one, the motor has no brushes, since there is no electrical connection between the armature and the fields and, two, the armature can be made of steel laminations, instead of the large number of windings required in other motors.  These features make it more robust and cheaper to build than a commutator motor.

AC Drive
Modern electronics has given us the AC drive.  It has only become available with modern electronics because the speed of a 3-phase AC motor is determined by the frequency of its supply but, at the same time, the power has to be varied.  The frequency used to be difficult to control and that is why, until the advent of modern electronics, AC motors were almost exclusively used in constant speed applications and were therefore unsuitable for railway operation.  A modern railway 3-phase traction motor is controlled by feeding in three AC currents which interact to cause the machine to turn. The three phases are most easily provided by an inverter which supplies the three variable voltage, variable frequency (VVVF) motor inputs. The variations of the voltage and frequency are controlled electronically.
The AC motor can be used by either an AC or DC traction supply system. In the case of AC supply (Figure 12), the line voltage (say 25kV single phase) is fed into a transformer and a secondary winding is taken off for the AC to DC converter (rectifier) which produces a DC output of say 1500 - 2000 volts depending on the application. This is then passed to the motor converter (inverter) which provides the controlled three phases to the traction motors.  The connection between the rectifier and the inverter is called the DC link.  This usually also supplies an output for the train's auxiliary circuits.

All the thyristors are GTOs, including those in the rectifier, since they are now used to provide a more efficient output than is possible with the older thyristors.  In addition, all the facilities of DC motor control are available, including dynamic braking, but are provided more efficiently and with less moving parts.  Applied to a DC traction supply, the 3-phase set-up is even more simple, since it doesn't need a transformer or a rectifier.  The DC line voltage is applied to the inverter, which provides the 3-phase motor control.

Control of these systems is complex but it is all carried out by microprocessors.   The control of the voltage pulses and the frequency has to be matched with the motor speed.  The changes which occur during this process produce a set of characteristic buzzing noises which sound like the "gear changing" of a road vehicle and which can clearly be heard when riding on the motor car of an AC driven EMU.

IGBT
Having got AC drive using GTO thyristors universally accepted (well, almost) as the modern traction system to have, power electronics engineers then produced a new development.  This is the IGBT or Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor.  The transistor was the forerunner of modern electronics, (remember transistor radios?) and it could be turned on or off like a thyristor but it doesn't need the high currents of the thyristor turn off.  However it was, until very recently, only capable of handling very small currents measured in thousandths of amps.  Now, the modern device, in the form of the IGBT, can handle thousands of amps and it has appeared in traction applications.  A lower current version was first used instead of thyristors in auxiliary supply inverters in the early 1990s but a higher rated version has now entered service in the most recent AC traction drives.  Its principle benefit is that it can switch a lot faster (three to four times faster) than GTOs.  This reduces the current required and therefore the heat generated, giving smaller and lighter units. The faster switching also reduces the complex "gearing" of GTOs and makes for a much smoother and more even sounding acceleration buzz from under the train.  With IGBTs, "gear changing" has gone.

Permanent Magnet Motor
The next development in electric motor design is the permanent magnet motor. This is a 3-phase AC synchronous motor with the usual squirrel cage construction replaced by magnets fixed in the rotor. The motor requires a complex control system but it can be up to 25% smaller than a conventional 3-phase motor for the same power rating. The design also gives lower operating temperatures so that rotor cooling isn't needed and the stator is a sealed unit with integral liquid cooling. By 2011, a number of different types of trains had been equipped with permanent magnet motors, including 25 AGV high speed train sets, trams in France and Prague and EMUs in Europe and Japan. The reduced size is particularly attractive for low floor vehicles where hub motors can be an effective way of providing traction in a compact bogie. Development of motor design and the associated control systems continues and it is certain that the permanent magnet motor will be seen on more railways in the future. A good description of the motor by Stuart Hillmansen, Felix Schmid and Thomas Schmid is in Railway Gazette International, February 2011. 




Arquivo 067 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/brakes/electro-pneumatic-brakes-d.html

The electro-pneumatic (EP) brake was introduced in the early years of the 20th century in an attempt over come the lag in the operation of the pure air brake. Originally designed for subways or metros, electro-pneumatic brake systems are now common on main line passenger railways and on some specialised freight operations. Its main advantage over the air brake is its speed of control and quick on-vehicle reaction times, giving instantaneous control of the whole train to the driver. Its speed of operation makes it ideal for automatic train operation (ATO).  EP braking is not the same as ECP braking.  ECP brakes have been introduced recently in an attempt to overcome the drawbacks of the air brake system on long freight trains. We discuss ECP brakes later in this article.
Background
Even the most modern, purely air brake systems rely on the transmission of an air signal along the brake pipe. This is initiated from the front of the train and has to be sent to all vehicles along the train.  There will always be a time lapse (called the propagation rate) between the reaction of the leading vehicle and the reaction of one at the rear. This time lapse is a considerable restraint on operation. It causes the braking of vehicles to happen at different times along the train so that while some cars are slowing down, others are still trying to push, unbraked, from the rear.  When releasing, the front of the train is pulling the rear, which is still braking, and causes stress to the couplers.  Another drawback is the lack of a graduated release on older systems, an elusive goal for many years. 

The introduction of electric traction and multiple unit control was the spur which eventually produced electrically controlled air brakes.  The rise of rapid transit operations in cities, with their high volume and frequent stops and starts, meant that quick responses to brake commands and accurate stopping at stations was an essential ingredient in getting more efficiency. EP brakes first appeared in the US. They were tried on the New York Subway in 1909 and then on London Underground in 1916.







Arquivo 068 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/brakes/electro-pneumatic-brakes-d.html

Principles of the E-P Brake. There are many types of e-p brake systems is use today and most of them were developed as an "add-on" to the original air brake system and, as a result, incorporated some common principles in their design as follows:
The e-p brake operates as the service brake while the air brake is retained for emergency use
The e-p brake does not compromise the fail-safe or "vital" features of the air brake
The air brake normally remains in the "Release" position, even while the e-p brake is in "Application" and the same brake cylinders are used.
E-P brakes are invariably used on multiple unit passenger trains.
E-P brakes use a number of train wires to control the electrically operated brake valves on each car.
The train wires are connected to a brake "valve" or controller in the driver's cab.
EP Control
Electro-Pneumatic brakes are controlled by the driver's brake valve handle.  It is usually the same handle used to control the air brake.  Electrical contacts are provided so that selection of a position will energise the train wires required to operate the e-p valves on each car. Current to operate the brake control is supplied from a battery through a control switch, which is closed in the operative cab.
Brake Cylinder Pressure

It is essential to ensure that, during braking, the train wheels do not skid. Skidding reduces the braking capability and it damages wheels and rails. Wheels involved in a skid will often develop "flats", a small flat patch on the tyre which can normally only be removed by reprofiling the wheel in a workshop. To reduce the risk of skidding, brake cylinder pressure must be restricted. In a pure air brake system, a natural restriction is imposed by the maximum allowed brake pipe pressure and in the proportion of volume between the auxiliary reservoir and the brake cylinder. In an EP equipped train, the main reservoir supply may not restricted, so it would be possible to go on pumping air into the brake cylinder until it burst. Of course, this will not happen because the brake cylinder is fitted with a safety valve (not shown in the diagram) set at the maximum pressure normally obtained in full braking.



Arquivo 069 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/brakes/electro-pneumatic-brakes-d.html

E-P Variations
There have been a number of developments of the e-p braking system over the years, including a common addition - the "Self Lapping" brake.  There have also been "retardation controllers" and, more recently, variable load control and single wire or P-wire control.

Self Lapping Brakes
A "self lapping" brake is really a brake controller (brake stand or brake valve, call it what you will) in the driver's cab, where the position of the brake handle between "Release" and  Application" corresponds to the brake rate achieved by the equipment - in theory at least.  This is similar in principle to the self lapping control valves fitted to some air braked locomotives. A number of different systems have been adopted, including one which uses a pressure sensitive valve detecting brake cylinder pressure and comparing it with the position of the brake handle. When the pressure corresponds to the position of the brake handle, the application electrical connection is opened to keep the brake cylinder pressure at that level. 

Another version was developed, using a mercury filled tube inside the brake controller.  The mercury was used to conduct the control current to the application and holding wires.  The shape of the tube was oval and it was aligned "forward and aft" so it allowed the mercury to flow forward if the train started braking.  When "Application" was called for, the movement of the brake handle towards full application tilted the mercury tube backwards and caused the holding and application valves to be energised.  As the train brakes applied, the mercury detected the slowing of the train and it ran forward in the tube.  This had the effect of cutting off the application so that the rate of braking conformed to the angle of the tube set by the driver's movement of his brake handle.

Retardation Controller
The mercury brake controller was an adaption of a device introduced to London Underground in the mid-1930s called the "mercury retarder" or "retardation controller". 

The mercury retarder is a dynamic switch set into the e.p. brake application circuit, comprising a glass tube filled with mercury.  It is mounted parallel to the motion of the train so that the mercury fluid reacts to the train's braking.  The tube is curved so that the electrical contact at the base is always covered with mercury but a second contact, set higher up the rear of the tube, becomes exposed when the mercury runs forward during braking.  It has the effect of measuring the deceleration rate.  It cuts off application at a pre set level, no matter how much more the driver tries to put into the brake cylinders.  Its main purpose was to reduce flatted wheels.  It also acted as a crude form of load compensation. 

In the London Underground version, two retarders were provided and they were stationary, being fixed in the driving car.  They were used to regulate the rate of braking at the full application end of the range, primarily to reduce skidding and the dreaded "flats" on wheels.  One retarder limited the application while the second was used to reduce the brake cylinder pressure by releasing some air through a special "blow down" valve.

Retardation controllers were later used to control braking rates on the world's first ATO railway, the Victoria Line.  Four were used in all, each being set at a different angle and selected as necessary to give the required braking rate.  They were also used by British Rail as self-lapping brake controllers provided on the EMU stocks built in the 1960s and 70s.

Variable Load Control
Although the retardation controller is a form of load control - because the braking rate is monitored, a heavier train will require more brake cylinder pressure, so the retarder will not reach its setting until the right rate is reached - it is rather crude. It only monitors the whole train, not individual cars. This means that lightly loaded cars in a generally heavy train are still at risk from a skid or wheelslide, as it is called. The solution is in variable load control. The car weight is monitored, usually by a lever fitted between the car and the bogie, which detects the bogie spring depression as weight increases. The lever is connected to a regulating valve in the brake cylinder feed pipe, so that the brake cylinder pressure is varied in relation to the weight of the car.  With the introduction of air suspension, load control is achieved by monitoring the level of air in the suspension system and regulating brake cylinder pressure accordingly. Nowadays, the same load signals are used to vary acceleration and dynamic braking according to car weight.



Arquivo 070 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/brakes/electro-pneumatic-brakes-d.html

The P-Wire Control. As train control systems grew more complicated, more train wires were required and the traditional 10-wire jumper used by so many railways grew to the 27-wire or 40-wire jumper often seen today. In an attempt to reduce wiring, a novel form of e-p brake control appeared in the 1970s called the P-wire system. The brake rate was controlled by a single wire carrying pulses of different lengths to correspond to different brake rates. The pulse width was modulated to correspond to the brake demand required and it became know as the PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) system or P-wire, for short. The system was "fail-safe" in that no pulse activated the full brake while a continuous pulse kept the brake released. 

The Three-Step Brake. Another development for electrical brake control was the 3-step system adopted on British railway EMU trains in the 1970s. It was based on the Westcode 7-step brake system where three steps were taken for service braking use. These were broadly described as minimum, normal and full service braking. With the addition of “Release” and “Emergency” the full range of braking controls were provided. It also eliminated the need for a brake pipe.
Brake Blending

Most trains are now provided with a combination of friction braking and dynamic braking. The dynamic braking system uses the electric traction motors of the locomotive or train to provide a braking effort by reversing the electrical connections so that the motors become generators. The energy generated by the motors is fed into on-board resistors (rheostatic braking) or back into the electric traction supply system (regenerative braking).

Dynamic braking only operates on wheelsets that have electric motors. Other wheelsets need to be provided with friction braking and, in case  the dynamic braking ins’t available, the friction brake is provided on motored axles too. The control of the two brake systems is managed automatically by a brake blending system.
The brake blending system is set up so that, when the driver (or the ATO system, if the train is automatically controlled) calls for brake, the dynamic brake is the preferred option. This is because it can save energy through regeneration and it reduces wear on brake pads or brake shoes and on discs and wheels. If the dynamic brake meets the brake demand, the friction brake is held off. If the dynamic brake effort is unable to meet the demand called for, the friction brake is added as necessary. The feedback loop that this arrangement incorporates provides a blended brake application that will always meet the demand.
PBL90 System

No survey of the electro-pneumatic brake would be complete without a reference to the European system known as PBL90.  This is not a pure e-p brake system as used on metros and suburban systems but more of an electrically assisted air brake control system. It is designed to allow vehicles with no electro-pneumatic brake controls to operate in a train with e-p control available on the locomotive or power car. For a description of the control system including diagrams






Arquivo 071- http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/train-equipment/brakes/electro-pneumatic-brakes-d.html

The Electronically Controlled Pneumatic (ECP) brakes. A new form of electrical control of air braking is currently being tested by a number of railroads in the US. It is known as ECP and uses modern electronic techniques to overcome the problems of air braking on long freight trains.

The pure air control brake system invented by George Westinghouse in the 1860s and still used by almost all freight trains in the US and in many other parts of the world suffers from two main problems. It takes a long time for the air messages to travel along the train and there is no graduated release. For example, the delay for a reduction in train line pressure to travel from the leading locomotive to the rear of a 150 car consist can be 60 seconds. Also, you have to fully release the brake and wait for the supply reservoirs to recharge before you can reapply. Electrical control can overcome these difficulties.

ECP refers to Electronically Controlled Pneumatic brakes, key word being "Electronically" as opposed to "electrically". Older systems fitted to passenger trains (see above), use several train wires to operate individual valves or variations in switching of the wires to control brakes. Most of these systems use a second train line for main reservoir air supplies and they do not have the built-in two-way communications that ECP systems have. A car in an ECP brake train can do a self-diagnosis and report the information to the engineer and it only requires the standard train line pipe.

The Operation of ECP. There is a control box on top of the engineer's console. When he wants to apply brakes the engineer pushes the button until the readout shows the amount of brake cylinder pressure (or percentage of braking effort) he wants. He releases the button; the control unit then codes and sends the signal to all cars. They in turn receive and interpret the message. They then begin allowing compressed air from their reservoirs to go to the brake cylinder until the desired cylinder pressure is achieved. The microprocessors on the cars will continuously monitor brake cylinder pressure against leakage and maintain the desired pressure.

If the engineer wants to reduce brake cylinder pressure he simply pushes the release button until the desired level is indicated, either partial or full release. Again a signal is coded and transmitted to the cars. The cars in turn do as commanded. If the engineer asks for only a partial reduction of braking effort, he can increase the effort again as needed without doing a full release first. The processor on the car is constantly monitoring brake pipe, reservoir tank and brake cylinder pressures.

When braking commands are not being transmitted, the head end (control) unit is sending out status messages. The last car in the train (which knows it is last due to the head end doing a train query and initialisation at start-up) will respond to each status message from the head end. All cars in the consist will monitor these messages, and if a car fails to receive three status messages in a row from either the head end or the rear end, it will assume that the train is broken in two or that the electrical line is broken. It will then initiate an emergency stop, while trying to tell the other cars and loco that it is doing so.

The Power Sources for ECP. Each car has a rechargeable battery to provide the high power requirements when solenoids need to be activated. When the high power is not being used, the batteries will trickle recharge from the communications/power cable. (If the train uses radio communication the batteries will recharge while the car is in motion via an onboard generator creating power from the motion of the car, either an axle generator, or natural frequency vibration generator or some other type of device.)

The hardwired system uses roughly 25% of its signal capacity for brake commands and status messages. Distributed power, controlled via the same cable uses another 10-15%, leaving 60-65% of the signal capacity for special monitors on the car, such as bearing sensors, temperature sensors for reefers on tankers, pressure sensors for tankers, etc.

The Manufacturers Systems. TSM, which was a subsidiary of Rockwell International, developed the first working ECP brake units. They are now owned by WABCO. In addition, Westinghouse Air Brake, New York Air Brake (a subsidiary of Knorr Corp.), GE/Harris and a small company called Zeftron, are developing ECP units.

TSM's first units worked in an "overlay" mode, where a module was placed between the air pilots and the actual valves, so that the system could work both ways. Zeftron started out working on an "emulator" brake valve, which totally eliminates the air pilots. The system, which must always be powered, looks for ECP commands. If it finds none, it monitors brake pipe pressure and behaves just like a standard air brake. If ECP command signals are present, the units behave like an ECP brake.

Because of the sequential operations of standard brakes, there is a flow control which limits how fast the air can flow into the brake cylinder. On ECP systems, because there is instantaneous reaction from all cars at once, these flow controls are not used. The lack of sequential activation and flow controls combined is what makes ECP brakes so responsive.

TSM is now introducing an emulator system. This enables cars fitted with it to work in ECP trains and non-ECP trains.  New York Air Brake has a system available for sale in the very near future. Westinghouse Air Brake is playing it cool, waiting for all of the specs to be written and all of the bugs worked out before they commit to anything.

Benefits
Some of the benefits of ECP braking have already been mentioned; instantaneous response to the engineer's commands on all vehicles, graduated release of brakes and continuous replenishment of reservoirs. But there are other and more significant benefits for the industry as a whole.

With the new responsiveness of ECP braking, braking distances will be reduced. A range of 30 - 70% reduction has been quoted. This will allow shorter stopping distances and will, in turn, allow higher speeds. The improved train handling will reduce slack action, breakaways and derailments and will lead to a reduction in draft gear maintenance.

There may be a price to pay. Although the current view is that brake shoe and wheel wear will be reduced, it is easy to see that engineers will develop their handling skills with the new system and this will lead to higher speeds needing more and heavier brake applications. A wise railway management will recognise this and will review its speed limit zones to ensure the maximum benefits are obtained without excessive brake usage.

Developments
There was much discussion amongst experts regarding the need for an end-of-train (EOT) device or letting the last car act as the end-of-train beacon. It seems that the last word on EOT beacons was that there will be one!

There are committees that are developing specs right now to permit the addition of monitors onto cars. The monitors will have their own microprocessors and will only send a signal to the head end when something on the car is going out of specified limits. This keeps the communications line open for brake commands, loco commands, and emergency messages.

A further development will be the use of the electronic train line for diagnostics, where the head end position can be informed of hot boxes, car load temperatures, tanker pressures, wagon doors not closed, parking brake off/on and the like.

ECP Record
There was a record-breaking, 600 km round trip by a train fitted with ECP braking in Australia.  On 28 June 1999, a train comprising 240 wagons, five GE Dash 8 diesel-electric locomotives and weighing 37,500 tonnes was equipped with the GE Harris EPx radio-based, electronic brake control system.  It was the longest and heaviest train ever to be fitted with an ECP brake system.  The locomotives were fitted with the same company's Locotrol remote locomotive control system.  The train operated over the BHP Iron Ore line between Port Headland and Yandi Mine.  Source IRJ.





Arquivo 072- http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/diesel-locomotives/us-locomotive-mu-control.html

There is one standard arrangement approved by the AAR and its member railroads and manufacturers to enable each unit of a locomotive consist to function as one from the controls of any unit in the consist.  Note that I am not speaking of the "Locotrol" or other radio apparatus for remote control; merely about more than one locomotive coupled together and controlled from one cab, in North American practice.  There have been other schemes and variations in the past, such as the Baldwin pneumatic system, but these are NOT compatible with the existing standard and cannot be used in AAR interchange service.  Some locomotives, generally older, low-hp switchers, are not equipped with any mu (multiple unit) system.

The Connections Between Locomotives. There are two basic connections required between locomotives to achieve the mu operation. One is the independent (loco-only) air brake and the second is all the other functions. The air brakes of the locomotives are controlled by the three (or sometimes, four) additional air hoses mounted on both pilots (headstocks) of each loco on one or both sides of the coupler. All other functions, whether mechanical or electrical, are electrically controlled through the jumper cable between units, which is the thick, hose-like cable hung below the walkway plates which bridge the gap between units. This cable contains 27 wires and has large, cast aluminium plugs each end which fit mating sockets on each end of each locomotive. [See "Model Railroader's" Diesel Locomotives Cyclopedia Vol. 2, p. 22-23 for a picture and diagram of these hoses and cables.] Sometimes these cables are removed when not in use and stored inside the loco and sometimes dummy plugs are used to secure the cable on the end of the loco.

Brakes
The air brakes on a Diesel or electric locomotive are "independent" of the brakes used on the rest of the train. When a train ("automatic") brake application is made, the locomotive will react the same as any boxcar, applying its brakes. However, the engineer can override, or "bail-off" application on the locomotive.

The 3 hoses that run between the units enable the control of all units as one. The hoses are, from the coupler out, MR (main reservoir) ACT (actuating) and BC (brake cylinder), or sometimes AR (application and release). The MR hose couples all of the main reservoirs in the units together, creating one large reservoir to increase air capacity and share the load among the air compressors of each unit. The ACT hose is pressurised when the engineer bails off, to release the brakes on all units. The BC hose is pressurised according to the degree of braking effort the engineer has selected. However, there is no direct connection between the brake cylinders on the different units.

The amount of pressure required for different types of locomotive brake systems (usually 45 or 70 psi) is proportionally controlled by a relay air valve on each unit, which senses the input pressure and sends the proper pressure to the cylinders on its unit. These valves also provide a check-valve function, to trap some air on each unit in case of separation while running. If there is a fourth hose on each side, it is used to mu older locomotives that do not have electrically controlled sanders.

To "hook up" or mu the brakes on more than one unit, only the three (four on older units) hoses, plus the main train line hose under the coupler, need to be hooked up, and the corresponding valves behind the pilot opened.

In the cab, we will assume the units are equipped with 26L brakes, as most are today. In the lead unit, everything will stay the same regarding the air brakes. In a trailing unit, you have to select whether you want the brakes controlled from the unit you are in, or from another unit. The MU-2A valve is located on the side of the control stand below the feed valve. It can be either a knob or a lever. In the "Lead or Dead" position, the independent brakes are controlled from this unit. In "Trail" position, the independent brakes are controlled through the mu hoses from another unit. Failure to position this valve properly can result in sticking or inoperative locomotive brakes.

The feed valve supplies and regulates the air supplied by the automatic brake valve to the train line (brake pipe). It must be isolated from the train line on trailing units to keep from causing an inadvertent automatic brake release. This is done by turning the "cut-out" or "double-heading" cock on the front of the automatic brake valve to "Out" on all trailing units. The automatic brake handle is placed in the "Handle Off" position and the independent brake is placed in the "Off" position. On most units, the brake handles may be removed to prevent tampering. If the handles are left in place, an emergency brake application may be made from the trailing units, regardless of how they are set-up (handy on helper units, for example). Special valves are used to retain enough air to apply the locomotive brakes on each unit should there be an inadvertent separation of the units.



Arquivo 073 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/electric-locomotives/the-early-history-of-the-dc.html

Today, the electric motor is an essential part of railway technology both for diesel and electrically powered trains. Back in the 1870s, steam locomotives were the only form of traction on the railways and electricity was a novelty science but it eventually became mainstream, gradually being developed for lighting and motor power. Within 20 years, electrically driven tramcars and locomotives had been introduced for urban railways and were being trialled on main line railways.

First, it is worth remembering that electric motors for use on tramcars were developed by a number of different engineers, all of whom contributed ideas and tested them, largely independently. There was a great deal of rivalry in the early electric motor business because people realised the enormous potential of the technology and the enormous profits that it might generate. 

The first electric motor that we would recognise today as a workable machine was developed by the Belgian engineer Zenobe Gramme. He discovered, by accident in 1873, that the dynamo that he'd invented produced electric current that another machine of the same design could convert back into rotation. When the armature of the dynamo was turned within a magnetic field to produce electric current and this was connected by a pair of wires to another dynamo, he discovered that the armature of the other dynamo was turning. He thus found that the mechanical design of a dynamo (or generator, as we would call it today) was the same as an electric motor. Other engineers soon took up the concept and improved it. Although the machines were crude, they were the first direct current (DC) electrical machines to be commercially successful and were gradually improved as experience with them was gained.

The Gramme machine had a ‘ring armature’ as shown in Figure 1. The disadvantage of the ring armature was that the arrangement of the armature coils tended to reduce the electorate-magnetic effect of the armature. This was solved by re-arranging the windings into the drum form adopted by Siemens
Sprague’s Design
The Gramme motor worked but it was not very efficient and an American engineer, Frank J. Sprague, was convinced that it could be improved. During late 1883 and early 1884, Sprague worked on developing a better version of the motor. The DC motor consists of a rotating part, known as the armature, and a static part known as the field. In the early designs, the field was normally connected in parallel with the armature circuit to create the magnetic field that would generate the turning of the armature. This was known as a shunt wound motor and Sprague’s early motors were designed like this. Later, he added a series field to make what we now call a compound wound motor. This worked better in how it controlled the speed of the motor. 
The Wheelbarrow. The Sprague motor was a reasonable success. It was used for driving looms and other, similar, constant speed machinery. Once it started to sell, Sprague also used the design as the basis for his experimental electric traction motors for tramcars. During this development, he contributed another important principle for electric traction.  He thought that the motor should be mounted under the vehicle as close to the wheels as possible. Previously, motors had usually been mounted inside the vehicle with a connection to the axle by a chain or belt. Sprague thought that the motor should be close to the axle as possible and should drive it through a pinion and gear arrangement. 

Sprague's motor was mounted so that one end of it was supported by the axle while the other was carried by the transom of the truck (bogie) frame. Sprague referred to this as a ‘wheelbarrow’ design. Today, this is known as the nose suspended motor. The design has survived for over 100 years.



Arquivo 074 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/electric-locomotives/the-early-history-of-the-dc.html

Improvements
One common problem for streetcar motors was contamination by dirt and water. The early motors were not enclosed, the designers assuming that they would be sufficiently protected by the car body. However, the fields and the ends of the armatures where the commutators were located were open to the elements and quickly became damaged by water, mud, snow or dust. In an effort to minimise the damage, canvas covers were tried at first but, in March 1891 in the US, Westinghouse, who entered the field of motor manufacture the year before after seeing the successes of other suppliers, produced the first electric traction motor that included most of the requirements that became the standard: series armature winding, machine wound coils and four field coils (Figure 4). Six months earlier, a company called Wenstrom had produced a motor where the armature windings were fitted in slots cut into the core rather than being wound round a drum, another feature to become standard.
Gears
It was quickly recognised that to provide effective torque on an electric railway car with a motor small enough to fit under the car, the drive connecting the motor to the axle needed to be geared. The ratios chosen were initially quite high; Sprague’s original two-stage gear ratio for the Richmond streetcars was 12:1. The early drives had two pinions and two gears but the system did not wear well. The gear teeth wore out very quickly and they were noisy. The average life of a streetcar motor gear set was about two months. Sometimes gears would seize, causing locked wheels and stalling the vehicle.  

Some designers tried to overcome the problem by using gearless motors, where the armature was fitted directly round the axle but these motors were heavier and less efficient than the geared ones. The first gearless motor was designed by Edward Hopkinson for the City & South London Railway in 1890, following a suggestion originally made years before by William Siemens. 

By the mid-1890s, refinements in motor and gear design had reached a stage where gears were reliable enough and the gear ratio was normally between 3 and 4 to 1. With this ratio, only one pinion/gear set was required. 

Brushes
Although various engineers had built electric cars for use on street railways, none of them were really successful until Sprague equipped the first viable electric street tramway in Richmond, Virginia in 1888, using his compound wound motors, but there were considerable problems. The two most serious were first, that the motors were underpowered at 7.5 h.p. and second, the vulnerability of the brushes. Larger motors were fitted eventually but the brushes remained a problem.

The brushes were crucial to the operation of the motor. They connected the static field to the rotating armature. The problem was that, up to that time, brushes were made of copper or brass. Because they were flexible and were expected to operate in both directions, they wore out very quickly. Then, another engineer in the US, Charles van de Poele, put forward the idea of using carbon brushes in 1890; the problem was on the way to being solved and their use survives to this day. The carbon brush was refined by a Hopkinson patent, also of 1890, who proposed putting the brush in a tube and adding a spring to keep the pressure on the commutator constant.

The Series Motor
Most of the early traction motors were shunt wound - where the field coils were wired in parallel with the armature circuit - apart from Sprague’s early compound wound motors. The power to the motor was usually controlled by varying the field resistance.  However, in 1891, Westinghouse produced a series wound motor, where the field was wired in series with the armature and where the whole motor circuit was controlled by a variable resistance that was inserted in series with the motor upon starting and then cut out in steps to increase speed. Again, this remained the standard method of motor control until the introduction of solid state thyristor control in the 1980s. 

The End of the Beginning
By the early 1890s, the design of the DC traction motor was largely settled and it remained in widespread use throughout the 20th century. It underwent a few developments in manufacture and improvements in commutator and wiring design but an engineer from 1892 could look at the motor still used under many electric trains today and recognise the machine as almost the same as his. 

However, with the introduction of solid state power electronics in the 1970s, the writing was on the wall for the DC motor and the long desired goal of being able to use alternating current (AC) induction motors, with 3-phase power control, was finally within sight. In the railway traction business now, the DC motor is only still seen on older trains.




Arquivo 075 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-index-l/bogies.html

Railway bogies are hardly noticed by the average passenger but they are an essential part of the the train, its drive system and its guidance mechanism. A standard railway vehicle will have two bogies, generally located near the vehicles ends. Each bogie is a 4-wheeled or 6-wheeled truck that provides the support for the vehicle body and which is used to provide its traction and braking. Each carriage (called a car in North America and some other English speaking countries and still so called in the electric traction business) has two bogies. The bogies support the mass of the vehicle, use the wheels to guide it along the track and provide some degree of cushioning against the shocks transmitted from the track during motion.
Steerable Bogies
A conventional bogie frame is turned into the curve by the leading wheelset as it is guided by the rails.  However, there is a degree of slip and a lot of force required to allow the change of direction. The bogie is, after all, carrying about half the weight of the vehicle it supports. It is also guiding the vehicle, sometimes at high speed, into a curve against its natural tendency to travel in a straight line.


Arquivo 076 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/steam-vs-diesel.html

There are a lot of myths and legends about locomotive power and the comparisons between steam and diesel locomotives, which have led to a lot of misconceptions and arguments.  Many of these arguments are based on romantic ideas of the beauty of steam and the perceived characterlessness of diesel locomotives.  However, in the end, railroads only want to purchase power which will haul the loads in the most efficient way.  Diesels replaced steam locomotives because that's what they did - they are more efficient because they cost less money to run.  This article, written by US locomotive engineer Al Krug in a series of newsgroup posts, tries to explain the power questions that show how diesels are more efficient than steam locomotives.  Oh yes, sorry, the figures are in imperial measurements. The US does not use metric measurements yet.

Steam Loco Physics
In any debate about the differences between diesel and steam locomotives the question of power comes into play. Whenever you are talking about the power of steam locos you must specify the speed, otherwise the statement is meaningless. Diesel Electric locomotives (DEs) develop their rated HP at any speed whereas steam develops it at only one speed. Why? Let us look at the physics.

We will assume a hypothetical 4-8-4 steam locomotive that weighs about 400,000 lbs without the tender and has 250,000 lbs of its weight actually carried by the driving wheels. The cylinders will be 28" in diameter (bore) and have a stroke of 30". The drivers are 60" in diameter and the boiler pressure will be 250 psi. All of these are "in the ball park" figures for a 4-8-4. We open the throttle and allow the 250 psi steam from the boiler to enter the cylinder. This steam pushes against the face of the piston. The force generated is the steam pressure times the surface area of the piston. In this case the area of the piston 14" squared times the constant "pi" or 14 x 14 x 3.14 which = 615 square inches. Each sq. inch of this is pushed on by 250 lbs (the steam pressure), which results in a total piston force of about 153,000 lbs. This force is connected to the driving wheel via the piston rod, main rod and driver crank pin.



The stroke of our engine is 30". This means that the crank pin must move 30" from front to back as it rotates about the driving axle as the driving wheel turns. That means the crank pin must be 15" away from the centre of the axle. The crank pin and driving wheel transmit the piston force to the rail. When the crank pin is at the point in its rotation directly below the driver axle, you can think of the section of the driver between the axle and the rail as a simple lever. The fixed end of the lever is at the axle and the free end is at the rail. The force is applied to this lever at the crank pin. The crank pin is 15" from the fixed end of the lever and the rail is 30" from the fixed end. This gives a 2 to 1 REDUCTION in the force applied at the crank. In other words the rail feels only 1/2 of the force applied to the piston. The piston produces 153,000 lbs of force and 76,000 lbs is felt at the rail.

Limitations
There are several problems with assuming the full power of the loco can be applied to the rail, however. First of all we only have 250,000 lbs on the drivers. At 20% adhesion (probably high for a steam loco) this means we can only apply 250,000 x 0.20 = 50,000 lbs to the drivers before they will slip. So we can't use all that 76,000 lbs of thrust. Only 50,000 lbs of it.

At first glance this looks like we should not even bother trying to develop that amount of thrust to begin with. Perhaps we should lower the boiler pressure to 164 psi so we only develop 50,000 lbs? Or maybe we should reduce the bore of the cylinder and thus the size of the piston to 22 inches so we only generate 50,000 lbs of thrust? Or we can increase the size of the drivers to 92"! That would limit the thrust reaching the rail to 50,000 lbs.

To use all the power available, we could increase the weight on drivers but not by much. We already have 62,500 lbs on each driving axle and 70,000 lbs is the maximum axle load limit i.e. the maximum the rail can hold. To use the full 76,000 lbs of thrust at 20% adhesion we would need 380,000 lbs on the drivers or 95,000 lbs per axle! Bend those rails! So, our only option to get increased weight on driving axles would be to add another driving axle and boost them all up to the 70,000 pound limit. This would give us 350,000 pounds on drivers, close to the needed 380,000 lbs. However we would still need to use one of the other methods mentioned above to reduce the remaining excess force. And, of course, we now have a 4-10-4 or a 2-10-2 not a 4-8-4.

In fact we do not have to do any of the things we have discussed to get the loco to work. What we have looked at so far has been some of the limitations you must consider and various ways of compensating for them. The real fact is that our original 4-8-4 loco will not deliver 76,000 lbs to the rail, actually only about 50,000 lbs. This is because we cannot apply full boiler pressure steam to the face of the piston throughout it entire power stroke. The AVERAGE cylinder pressure over the length of a stroke will actually be somewhat below the maximum boiler pressure.

There are several reasons for this. If we allow boiler pressure steam into the cylinder all the way to the end of this piston's stroke we are wasting steam. Think about it At the end of the stroke the crank pin is directly behind the driver axle. Pushing on the crank pin in this position does nothing to rotate the drive wheel. All the force does is try to bend the rod and shear the crank pin. So there is no sense at all in using steam to keep the cylinder pressure up near boiler pressure as the piston nears the end of its stroke. We may as well cut off the intake valve early and save this steam.

This means that the piston now no longer delivers its full force capability over its entire stroke, so our average thrust is considerably lower than the piston's maximum capability. The piston only applies its force for about an eighth of the driver's rotation, that portion when its crank pin is near the bottom of its rotational travel. This corresponds to the mid-stroke of the piston. The loco has four pistons however, two double-acting cylinders. The crank pin on the other side of the driver is 90 degrees off from this side so the power stroke of each piston supplies its thrust in a different quarter of the driver's rotation.

Constant Force
At this point we have determined that our loco develops about 50,000 lbs of continuous pull. Note that this pull is constant regardless of speed. As long as we keep the same steam pressure against the faces of the pistons, the same force is produced regardless of the loco speed. A STEAM LOCOMOTIVE IS A CONSTANT FORCE MACHINE! That is a very significant fact. It is fundamentally different from the Diesel Electric locomotive, which is a constant HP machine. On the surface it would seem that a constant force machine would be great for a locomotive and indeed in some respects it is. Since the force or pull of a steam loco is constant regardless of speed what does that say about HP? Horsepower is the product of pull times speed (divided by a constant). If the pull is constant and the speed rises then the HP also increases. So you see, my original question asking "at what speed" is the HP developed was a fair question after all. If you quote steam loco HP you must also state the speed.




Arquivo 077 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/steam-vs-diesel.html

Pulling Power
Lets couple our steam loco to a train. For our purpose the weight of the train does not matter as we are merely going to accelerate it on level track. A heavier train (more mass) will accelerate more slowly than a lighter train but the results will be the same. We open the throttle wide and instantly the steam loco develops its 50,000 lbs of pull. As the loco accelerates away from 0 mph its develops more and more HP. Here is a table of the theoretical HP of our constant 50,000 lb pull loco,

10 mph = 1333 HP

15 mph = 1999 HP

20 mph = 2666 HP

25 mph = 3333 HP

30 mph = 3999 HP

35 mph = 4666 HP

40 mph = 5333 HP

45 mph = 5999 HP

50 mph = 6666 HP

and so on. Man what a machine!

Train Resistance
But in reality it does not work out that way. A train does not roll freely. At some speed the rolling resistance of our train will equal the 50,000 lbs of drawbar pull available and the acceleration will stop. According to the Davis formula for train resistance, a 50 car 2500 tons train will have 50,000 lbs of drag at 117 mph. At this speed the loco would be generating 15,600 HP. Obviously this does not happen, why not?

Boiler Capacity
As loco speed increases so does the piston speed. The pistons make more and more power strokes in less and less time. Each power stroke requires steam. At some speed the appetite of the cylinders for steam is going to outpace the boilers capacity to supply it. The steam pressure is going to drop. Lower steam pressure means lower cylinder pressure which means lower piston force and thus lower loco pull. Since the HP of the steam loco is its pull times its speed the HP also levels off. The HP is limited by the capacity of the boiler to produce steam. We can remedy this by making the firebox bigger to burn more fuel and making the boiler bigger to hold more fire tubes to increase the heat exchange area. But now we have a bigger, different, loco. One that may be too heavy for 4 drive axles to support.

You can see from the above chart that if our loco is equipped with a 3,000 HP boiler it will begin to run out of steam at about 25 mph. That is as fast as the loco can go and still deliver its 50,000 lb drawbar pull. But it can go faster if we don't demand 50,000 lbs of pull from it. If steam pressure drops by half from 250 psi to 125 psi then the cylinder force is half and the loco pull is half. Now the loco has only 25,000 lbs of pull instead of 50,000. Allowing the boiler pressure to drop like this is bad practice. It is inefficient. It also affects the auxiliary devices such as electric light generator, air compressor and stoker engine. It would be much better if we kept the boiler pressure at 250 psi and limited the amount of steam we put into the cylinders. Instead of using the original amount of steam and causing boiler pressure to fall to half its original pressure, we can use half the amount of steam at full boiler pressure. The resulting force is the same.

Cut Off
We can limit the amount of steam going to the cylinders by leaving the intake valves open for less of the stroke. We close the intake valves earlier in the stroke. We "cut off" the flow of steam to cylinders early. This is exactly what the cut off lever (sometimes called a Johnson Bar in the US and a Reversing Lever in the UK) does. When an engineer adjusts the cut off lever, "notches up the cut off", "hooks up the Johnson bar", he is limiting the amount of steam going to the cylinders. If we put half the amount of steam into the cylinders as before, then the average force on the pistons is going to be half of what it was before. This translates directly into half the pull as before. Now our loco is only delivering 25,000 lbs of pull at any given speed instead of 50,000. What this means is that our loco will continue to accelerate our train, albeit more slowly, until the product of the new lower drawbar pull times the new higher speed equals the 3000 HP boiler capacity once again. At this new, higher speed, the cylinders will be moving twice as fast as before but each stroke is only consuming half as much steam. The total steam usage is the same as before and our 3000 hp boiler can keep up. In the first scenario the loco began running out of steam at 25 mph. Now it does not begin to run out of speed until 50 mph.

Further limiting the steam flow to the cylinders means the loco will move even faster before the piston speed causes this reduced flow of steam to equal the boiler capacity. Of course the resulting pull will be even lower also. Once again, the product of this even lower pull and higher speed will equal 3000 HP, the capacity of our boiler to produce steam.

So this steam loco is not a pure CONSTANT FORCE machine. It is only a constant force machine from 0 to 25 mph. Above that speed we have to limit the force by use of the cut-off so we don't exceed the boiler HP capacity. Above 25 mph the loco is a CONSTANT HP machine just like the Diesel Electric. I said earlier, we could increase the size of the boiler and the loco would continue to develop more HP as it accelerates. This has limits other than the size and weight problem described earlier. Even if we have a boiler designed for tremendous HP there is the problem of getting all that steam into and out of the cylinders in an ever shrinking period of time.

Back Pressure
The faster the loco goes the faster the pistons go back and forth in the cylinders and the less time we have during each stroke to move steam. At some speed the restrictions in the throttle valve, steam pipes, and valve passages are going to cause significant pressure drops. Pressure drop means less force and less HP developed. On the exhaust stroke we have to get all that steam out of the cylinder, through the exhaust valves, exhaust piping, and the exhaust nozzle. If we don't succeed in this, then some steam pressure remains in the cylinder, pushing against the wrong face of the piston and nullifying part of the steam pressure on the power side of this piston. This pressure is called back pressure. For these reasons we have to limit the amount of steam we try to put through the cylinders at high speed. Again the cut off lever comes in handy for this. So as speed increases we have to "notch her up", cut off the steam earlier in each stroke and HP levels off. There is no sense in putting a bigger boiler on this loco because we can't force any more steam through the cylinders anyway.

An Example
Now that we have the fundamentals let's look at a real life loco, the Timken roller bearing 4-8-4 #1111. In tests on the NP it gave the following results (rounded off):

10 mph = 1400 hp

15 mph = 2100 hp

20 mph = 2600 hp

25 mph = 3000 hp

30 mph = 3000 hp

40 mph = 3000 hp

50 mph = 3000 hp

In its constant pull phase from 0 to 25 mph it produced 50,000 lbs of pull +/- 2000 lbs. At 50 mph it only produced 23,000 lbs. This real life loco follows very closely what I predicted.




Arquivo 078 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/steam-vs-diesel.html

Comparing Performance of Diesel Electric to Steam.
This Timken 4-8-4 loco #1111 is essentially a 3000 hp single unit locomotive. Let us compare its performance with that of an SD40-2. (or a two unit 3000 hp F7, it makes no difference as long as the total weight is the same). Our 4-8-4 weighs about 400,000 lbs total engine, not counting the tender. It has about 250,000 lbs of its weight on its drivers. Our SD40 also weighs 400,000 lbs. All of its weight is on its drivers. The steamer is a constant pull machine below 25 mph and a constant HP machine above that speed. The SD is a constant HP machine throughout its range of about 8 mph to max speed. What consequences does this have on train performance?

Assume we hook each loco to an identical train. This train has 50 cars and weighs 2500 tons and we are rolling on level track. Since both locos are essentially 3000 HP units they will perform identically at speeds above 25 mph. Using the Davis formula for train rolling resistance we find that this train will develop 21,000 pounds of rolling resistance at 53 mph. Multiplying these figures and dividing by the constant 550 ft-lb per HP gives us 3000 HP. This train will need 3000 HP of pull at 53 mph. So both locos will do this. Their performance is identical.

Next, we roll the trains onto a 0.75% grade. Now in addition to the rolling resistance of the train we also have grade resistance. The grade resistance of this train will be 37,000 lbs. Since our locos can only pull 21,000 lbs at 53 mph, our speed will drop. HP is speed times pull. Since both of our locos are constant HP machines in this speed range this means their pull will go up as they slow down. As the speed drops the rolling resistance also drops. At some speed, the sum of the lowering rolling resistance and the grade drag will equal the increasing pull of the locos. This occurs at approximately 23 mph. The grade drag will be 37,000 lbs and the rolling resistance will be 13,000 lbs for a total of 50,000 lbs. The product of 50,000 x 23 mph = 3000 hp. Both locos will still perform identically.

Now let us roll onto a steeper grade, say 0.8% grade. On this grade the train has 40,000 lbs of grade drag. Its rolling resistance depends on its speed as usual. But at 25 mph it has 13,000 lbs of rolling resistance and 13,000 + 40,000 = 53,000 lbs. Our steam engine only has 50,000 lbs of pull. The train is going to slow down until the rolling resistance equals 10,000 lbs. (10000+40000=50000). This will occur at 5 mph. Our steam loco will chug over this hill with this train at a mere five mph. If you multiply the pull times the speed you find that the steam engine is only developing 666 hp! The DE on the other hand continues to develop its full 3000 hp at any speed. This means that as the DEs speed drops its pull continues to go up. At 21 mph the rolling resistance is about 12,000 lbs. The grade resistance is still 40,000 lbs. The total is 52,000 lbs and the DE can deliver this pull at that speed. 52,000 lbs times the speed is 3000 hp. (If you got lost in the math remember I am simplifying this and rounding off. The actual math is 52,000 lbs x 1.4666 ft per sec per mph x 21 mph / 550 ft-lb per sec per hp and that yields 2912 HP needed).

The SD will march this train over this grade at a whopping 21 mph! The steamer barely did it at 5 mph! What's more, if we roll onto a grade of 1.0% the grade resistance of our train is 50,000 lbs. This is all the steamer can muster, there is none left over for rolling resistance. The steamer is stalled. On a 1% grade our SD40 is still tromping along at 18 mph. In fact it will continue to pull this train on a grade as steep as 1.3% at a speed of 14 mph. At this speed the pull is 80,000 lbs. If the DE has a 20% factor of adhesion, the same used for the steamer, then it will slip if we try to pull more than 80,000 lbs (20% of 400,000 lbs = 80,000). So 14 mph is the slowest we can go at full throttle with the SD40. But the DE delivers its tractive effort in a much smoother continuous manner than the pulsing pull of the steam engine. Because of this it may achieve adhesion factors of around 25%. Using this figure we can load the unit down until it is pulling 100,000 lbs. For our fictional train above this works out to a grade of 1.8% and 11 mph.

From this discussion you can see that the DE beats the steam loco hands down. It is no contest at low speeds. The steamer is limited by its fixed drawbar pull. The drawbar pull is fixed because it is a function of boiler pressure, piston diameter and ratio of stroke to driver diameter. Increasing any of those values will allow our steam engine to generate more thrust. But we cannot use it. The steamer is limited to 50,000 lbs pull by its 20% adhesion factor and its 250,000 lbs on drivers. Changing the weight on drivers creates an entirely different steam engine.
Boosters
One way we can get increased pull without changing the wheel arrangement is to power the unpowered axles. We can add small steam cylinders to the trailing truck. Now at low speeds where there is excess boiler capacity we can use that extra steam in the trailing truck booster engine. This will increase the low speed pull because we have increased the weight on drivers by making non-driving wheels drivers. Booster engines on the trailing truck were maintenance headaches as I understand it. While the booster helps it still does not put all of the weight on the drivers. The leading truck is still unpowered so the steamer still cannot match the DE of same total weight.




Arquivo 079 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/steam-vs-diesel.html

Increasing Weight
Increasing total weight is inefficient. The weight of the loco does not go along the track for free. It takes HP to move it just like the train. The weight of a loco is a compromise between the maximum pull you want and the efficiency. In our demonstration our SD40 was 7.8% of the total weight of the train. It will therefore absorb 7.8% of its own HP just moving itself. The steam engine will do the same thing. But steam engines are usually rated at DRAWBAR HP not cylinder HP. This means that the power to move the loco itself has already been subtracted when quoting drawbar pull. You still have to pay for the fuel to move the loco but its pull is not derated from this loss.

The DE on the other hand is rated at HP for traction. Therefore you must subtract the part needed to move the loco to get the HP available for the train. What this means is that the performance figures for the DE above will be roughly 8% less than stated. In spite of this, the DE still shines in comparison to the steam loco.

When it comes to HP efficiency to move the locos the DE again shines. The steam loco has a tender that when loaded can weigh as much as the steam engine itself. This means it takes twice the HP and fuel to self propel the steam loco & tender as for the DE. It is possible that the steam loco being an external combustion engine as opposed to the DE being an internal combustion engine uses its fuel more efficiently. That is it may extract more of the heat value of the fuel to do useful work. This would offset some of the efficiency loss of dragging around a dead weight tender. I do not know the relative combustion efficiencies of steam loco vs. DE. If anyone has data to show that I am loony and my physics is all wrong then by all means do correct me. I purposely rounded off and simplified many things to keep this from being any longer or more obtuse reading than it is.

From the discussion I have presented, I can draw only one conclusion.... The railroads should convert to diesel electric locomotives as soon as possible and the steam engines should all be cut up for scrap. Oh......wait.......they did that. (Yes I enjoy watching them, listening to them, and smelling them. But I sure don't want 'em on the point of my freights).

Proof?
One may legitimately ask, why did I choose to compare the 4-8-4 to an SD40? The short answer is because it proves my point. Always beware of the writer's motives. The long answer is because the 4-8-4 (sans tender) and SD40 both weigh the same and both are 3000 HP. Our SD40-2s range from 383,000 lbs to 424,000 lbs. I have run many many SD40s in my time so I am familiar with what they will or will not do. If I made a mistake in my physics logic or the math the results would have stood out. I would recognise that the figure was way out of line according to my knowledge of the SD40. If I had used the 2 unit F7 it would also be 3000 hp but it would weigh 500,000 lbs or more. All of that weight would be on drivers and it would make the steamer look even worse than the SD40 did. One may ask why not use a GP40 for the comparison. A GP40 is also 3000 hp like the 4-8-4 and like the 4-8-4 it also has about 250,000 lbs on drivers. (Actually GP40s I have been on are more like 270,000 lbs). A 250,000 lb GP40 would be in a dead heat with the 4-8-4 as far as train performance is concerned. The GP40 will slow down on the hill to the point where the drawbar pull has risen to 50,000 lbs just like the SD40 and the 4-8-4. As it continues to slow it will deliver more than 50,000 lbs of force to the wheels and it will slip. It would have to be throttled down to maintain the force at 50,000 lbs and thus becomes a constant pull machine just like the 4-8-4. The two locos are virtually identical in this respect. The smoother force of the GP40 may enable it to get more than 20% adhesion, perhaps 25%. This would of course improve its performance somewhat over the steamer.

Another difference comes when you look at self-propulsion efficiency. The GP40 weighs 250,000 lbs verses 800,000 lbs for the steam loco with tender. The steam loco is going to take over 3 times the HP to self propel. The GP40 is about 60 feet long and the steamer is 110 feet. The problem with steam locos as far as physics is concerned is that old bugaboo, weight on drivers vs. total weight. I can't see them competing with DEs until you can build an 0-12-0 tank engine that will run at high speed or low all day & night without refuelling. All this and we still haven't addressed all those common complaints about steam vs. diesel electric.

Other Points
You know, the fact that steam requires a fireman, is not MU-able thus requires a crew for each loco, needs frequent water stops, needs frequent maintenance, has imbalances which pound the track, must be turned, can't be left at outlying points, etc., etc. must all be taken into account. After all, it's value for money which counts.

Why compare an SD40 to a 4-8-4 steam loco. Because they were both the same HP and the same weight. Although to be really equal in the weight category I should have included the tender weight. Had I done that the steam loco would not have even gotten out of the starting gate in this comparison.

It is said that a DE's HP is engine HP not drawbar HP so a 3000 HP DE is not really the same as a 3000 HP steam loco. OK granted. So if I'm going to compare equal drawbar HP locos then I get to use a 3600 HP DE verses a 3000 HP steam loco. Well, this makes the DE even more favourable. However, it is my actual experience based on train tonnage, grade, and speed that DEs are putting out 88% of their rated hp just for the grade. If you apply the Davis formula to see what the train rolling resistance is at that speed and add that HP to the grade HP you find that the DE is putting out 95% of its rated HP to the drawbar. Granted this is at low speeds and will be somewhat lower at high speeds.

Some say I should have used an FT or F3 contemporary DE. Why? Steam had 100 years of evolution by then and the DE was brand new. I say at the least we should compare them after similar evolutionary periods. Some say I should have used an articulated loco like the Allegheny or Big Boy. In my humble opinion, an articulated loco is actually two steam engines permanently MU'd together. Some even had separate boiler sections and some were even connected by an accordion-like bellows. So, if I'd used an articulated loco then I should get to use at least a two unit DE of equal HP. "Oh no", they cry, "We are comparing only single unit locos." See my opinion above about articulateds. In any case then, since the articulated has two engines I shall use two engines. If I mount two GP40 engines, or two Dash9-44CW engines, or two SD80 engines on a single frame it will still beat out the articulated.

But why apply the artificial restriction of a single frame. If there was an advantage to doing that for a DE then it would be done. The DD35s and 40s were not repeated. If I have two engines/generators why not mount them on separate frames. They are much more versatile that way. If one goes down only one goes to the shop. If westbound traffic is light today I can send one west and use the other east. I can even switch with one if I need. The articulated steam loco has to be on one frame because that is the only way a steam loco can be "MU'd" and operated with one engineer and one fireman. This restriction does not apply to DEs so why stipulate it arbitrarily. If we are going to make arbitrary restrictions then I can compare the largest steam loco to the largest DE that can be operated by one crew. DEs win that one, a 12 unit lash up is going to beat any tea kettle of any size.

If we are going to apply arbitrary restrictions then why not compare locos with equal number of cylinders? The steam loco is always going to beat the DE in that comparison. And the comparison is totally meaningless. My restriction of them both being the same HP and both the same engine weight is equally arbitrary. The only thing that really matters and the only thing that can really be compared meaningfully is how much does each form of propulsion cost the RR. The bottom line is all that matters. Not HP, not tractive effort, not numbers of crews, not the cost of fuel, not the purchase price of the loco, not which power can get the tonnage across the division fastest. What matters is the cost of all these things together. Only the total package concerns the RR. The total package is quite complex.

The Bottom Line
What is the cost of fuel for steam vs. DE? It is not just how much is used by each. It is not just the price of oil vs. coal. It is also the cost of handling that fuel, transporting it to where it is needed. You must consider the manpower it takes to run, service, and maintain each type. You must consider the availability, reliability, of each type. And you must consider the way in which the RR is operated. If steam happened to be better than DEs at high speed light weight trains that is not necessarily a plus if the RR does not operate that way. You may say that a RR SHOULD operate that way. Well it ain't your RR. Besides not all operations lend themselves to high speed light weight trains. Applying that requirement to a coal or grain haulier where he must use a LOT of HP on many small trains and you will price his service and thus the price of the commodity right through the roof. The whole package has to be compared and the total cost of each package is the only thing that can be compared. Everything else is academic nonsense.






Arquivo 080 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

The Process
Railway rolling stock manufacturing consists of a series of stages which begin with the signing of an order and culminate in the entry into service of a new train. These stages consist of signing the contract, doing the design, ordering materials and parts, manufacturing and assembly, testing and delivery. Train manufacture is a costly and time consuming business and there is a lot of risk in the process because a lot can go wrong. Apart from the technical difficulties of designing and building a complex, multi-million dollar project, everyone wants to play trains and interfere with the design, especially politicians and newspaper editors, both of whom have one thing in common - they know nothing about railways.

Timescales
So you want to buy a new train or locomotive? How long will it be before it is carrying passengers or hauling cars? Well, give yourself four years from the date you decide to buy. It can be done more quickly - a new locomotive order in the UK was once famous for having its first loco delivered 18 months after contract signing - but 3 or 4 years is more usual. Here, I am assuming that it is a new design, not a run-on order and that there will be over 80 new vehicles. I am also assuming that you know how many trains or locomotives you need and what the general basic design will need to be. The procurement process will occupy at least a year - add another if you need finance from the commercial market.  

So let's say you give the supplier Notice To Proceed (NTP) a year after you go to market. The design process will have already begun, since the supplier will have prepared a concept design as part of the bidding process. By the time he gets NTP, he will have got to a stage with his customer where he knows he is the preferred bidder and he will have started more detailed basic design work.

Six months after NTP, parts manufacture should start and, six months after that the first body might be ready for installation of its equipment and interior finishes. Give it another year for completion of equipping and a lot of testing before it is ready for shipping. By now, three years have gone already and the first car has still only just rolled out of the factory door. Acceptance testing on site and bureaucratic approvals may last months (at least a year in most European countries) before the train finally enters service. There is some slack in this broad outline because I am sure there will be technical problems on the way but we have used up our four years. Locomotives may take less as each one can operate as a unit and isn't dependent on other vehicles like an EMU (Electric Multiple Unit).
Design
This is where it all begins. Design work starts during the bidding process. The customer will issue an "invitation to tender" (ITT) and then wait for the rush. Rush? Well, not quite. It starts with the supplier producing an outline design, which is prepared against the ITT and then costed. These days, most manufacturers have created their own catalogue of vehicles that they would like to sell because they can build to pre-existing designs and offer them at a more competitive price. The designs are offered in modular form so they can be customised to suit the buyer's needs. Unfortunately, a contract (particularly one procured by a publicly-funded administration) is rarely as simple as this and, usually, the potential customer will have produced a specification that he wants his vehicle designed to. Invariably, this will not fit conveniently into the little niche of standard designs that the supplier hoped it would. Of course, this puts the price up. Many customers are now trying to procure through performance specifications, where the dimensions, capacity, speed, power requirements and reliability are specified rather than details like the make of door engines or colour of the upholstery for the driver's seat. This gives the supplier the chance to adopt standardisation in many areas, but many customers still fall into the trap of asking for a bespoke train and then coming to wonder why it is so expensive. 

Now, let us assume that the preliminary design was accepted, a price agreed and a contract awarded. The engineering design office (henceforth referred to as the DO - originally short for drawing office) will now swing into action and start developing a plan for the design work of the vehicle, which will include producing a Bill of Materials (BoM) that will identify all the details necessary to manufacture the vehicle. A preliminary list of drawings will be tied in with the BoM and there will probably be in excess of 3000 drawings needed. Meetings will be held with the purchasing and production departments to determine priorities for preparation of designs.

Design will be carried out using one or more computer aided design (CAD) packages. These allow 2-D and 3-D modelling and permit the designer to test how items can be assembled or removed for maintenance purposes. Much depends on good design management and on accurate software management. A good CAD system will allow the bill of quantities to be generated and will produce machine tool programmes to be used in the manufacturing processes.





Arquivo 081 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html


The Sub Suppliers. During the bidding phase, the DO will contact various sub-suppliers of brakes, lighting, seats, propulsion, traction motors etc. about the specifications, to determine who can, or is willing to meet the performance requirements. Many of these sub-suppliers will have framework contract with the main contractor and will know the levels of quality and production requirements. 

If you look at a piece of rolling stock, it is easy to see that the supplier is really just an assembler of many parts that are purchased from other suppliers. Perhaps all he has is a specialist shop for manufacture of the car bodyshell and one for the wiring looms, and the rest of the vehicle is bought from others. Some car builders, like Brush Traction in the UK, even buy complete locomotive body shells and bogies from external suppliers. However it is done, the vehicle design and assembly concept will eventually come together and some preliminary design drawings will be produced for presentation to the customer.

The Long Lead Ordering. It is at this point that some long lead items will be ordered. Steel, some types at least, can have a three-month lead time, especially if you want a special finish for an unpainted vehicle. Cables can require a six month lead time, particularly if they are of special fire proof or low toxicity specification. Car interior panels may also require specialist materials with long manufacturing periods. Of course, once you order these things, you are locked into the design, so you'd better be sure you get it right. There is very little room for error as profit margins in the railway industry are very low. You are doing well if you can generate more than 5% on a rolling stock order.

Materials

The quality of materials is another area that should be given full attention by the rolling stock manufacturer. Apart from the need to meet strength, durability and fire hardness requirements, the failure of a structural component can have serious consequences for the operator and the supplier. It will be expensive for a manufacturer to have to recall delivered car bodies to rectify structural defects, as happened in 2016 in Singapore, where the Chinese supplier has had to repair defective aluminium car bodies.

The Jigs and Tools. Another area which needs to be sorted out early is jigs and tools. The car body parts will have to be assembled in jigs to ensure that they are held rigidly and in the correct position during welding. The body shell itself will also require a large jig to assist in the assembly. Jigs cannot be designed until the body form is known and the construction methods agreed.

A jig is basically either a steel bed, shaped to carry the section to be welded, or it a series of specially formed steel frames, upon which parts will be fixed while they are welded.  The jigs will be fitted with adjustable clamps which will hold each piece in its correct position for welding.  Jigs come in all shapes and sizes, depending on the part or parts to be assembled and the welding system to be used.  Jig design is an art in itself and many a project has been a success or a failure because of the quality, or lack of it, of the jigs.
Some manufacturers have been known to try to cut back on the time or materials allowed for jig design and manufacture. This is always an expensive mistake. If the jigs are not right, the car body won't be right either. It is a sobering thought that, in the last 30 years, every new tube train London Underground has had delivered has not fitted into the tunnels. One fleet had to be rebuilt.

Tools are another important item which can be forgotten. If any specialist tools are required - like dies for stamping steel parts, these must be properly designed and manufactured to the highest standards. Specialist tool makers are best for the job. I have seen shop floors littered with rejected stampings and pressings, thrown out because they were poorly made with bad tools and therefore didn't fit were they were supposed to.

Manufacturing Engineering
The early design meetings will culminate when the scheduling department produces a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS), which will map out how the vehicle will go through each stage of manufacture and assembly to reach the final steps where it is commissioned and delivered to the eagerly awaiting customer. The WBS will have to match a time plan, the submission of which is invariably part of a contract these days, and which will contain milestones in the design and manufacturing process which the supplier must adhere to. It will also provide convenient packages for the design staff to work within so that drawings for the production process can be issued quickly for the first parts needed for assembly.

If the DO has been lucky, they will find that they are able to get away with only modifying and updating some existing drawing files and perhaps, if they are really lucky, only the drawing number will need to be changed. Of course, life is never that simple and there will be panics and much heart searching as new designs have to be developed within the time frame agreed with the customer and with the production control people in the factory.


#####################
Arquivo 082 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Configuration Control
Once the DO finishes a design package (a complete set of drawings for a specific item of manufacture), it is forwarded by a Configuration Control section to the manufacturing engineering department. Configuration Control is responsible for ensuring that all the drawings and documents connected with the contract are registered, submitted to the customer for approval, returned from the customer in time (they are often not), questions from the customer are answered, that the latest updates to drawings and instructions are passed to the production control people and all correspondence is noted and archived. It may sound bureaucratic but it is essential that all the paperwork is kept up to date and is retrievable in case there is any sort of dispute (and yes, there always is).

Configuration Control is also about monitoring the putting together of the vehicle as it gets built - ensuring not just that there are no parts missing but that all the parts fitted are at the correct modification state, both hardware and software. The former is difficult because of the slow rate at which hardware faults always seem to get corrected and the latter is even more difficult because of the sheer speed at which programmers empirically try to debug their products, with sometimes chaotic results.

Now the challenge comes: the DO has completed a design package and it is Manufacturing Engineering's turn to look at what has been produced to see if it can be made. Manufacturing Engineering is usually part of a team under the Project Manager who will be ensuring the vehicle is 'coming together', so to speak, and will also include a couple of engineers and draughters to make any changes that are needed. Sometimes it is necessary for the manufacturing department to produce additional drawings that will enable the manufacture to continue without delay. These will be produced in conjunction with the production department.

Production Control
Production Control have the responsibility of bringing all the various procurement and manufacturing areas together and ensuring a completed vehicle comes out of the shop with all the requirements of the customer to the schedule agreed with the customer.  To do this, using the BoM we talked about earlier, a schedule will be put together which will show what tasks are to be completed, where, using which machines or tools, when and by whom, in the manufacture of the vehicle. This will show the various work stations, identifying the tasks that will be performed at each station. Production control will also allocate materials, staff and times for each process. Production orders are then produced and passed to the manufacturing shops together with the drawings.

Materials & Equipment Buying
There are all sorts of fancy names for "buying" around nowadays; Purchasing, Procurement, Sourcing, Materials Management and so on, but when it comes down to it, buying is what this department does.  A manufacturer usually has one buying department which may be split into two sections - one to buy raw materials, the other to buy complete items of equipment.

The section buying the raw materials will get their orders from the manufacturing department and will be involved in the purchase of bar stock, sheet plate, nuts, bolts, piping, paint and probably such items as welding rods, glues and mastics. Their responsibility will be to ensure sufficient material is available in the machine shops, the fabricating shop or the paint shop to enable parts to be finished to schedule. They have to do this early in the process. We have already seen how some specifications for long lead items will have been agreed and ordered immediately after NTP.

The manufacturer’s section buying the equipment will, for the most part, have a more difficult job and they will deal mainly with the DO. This is because they will be reliant on the DO providing technical specifications to issue to the various sub-suppliers.  Sometimes the customer's specification will dictate whose equipment should be used. This makes it very difficult for the buyer to obtain a competitive price, as the sub-supplier will be aware that their equipment is specified by the customer. In any case, the buyer will be under pressure from the DO to identify a supplier to enable designs to be completed and he can become caught in a vicious circle if he is waiting for the specification from another group within the DO. 

To get a competitive quote, a manufacturer should get at least three quotes. Finding three suppliers of say, a braking system, can be a difficult task and, if it is a boom time for orders and the brake manufacturer has a full order book, getting his attention will compound the problem. But the buyer has to find the right product at the right price, so he will find himself in endless discussions and meetings with the salesmen and engineering staff of the supplier. The DO staff will want to meet with the engineers from the supplier to learn about the physical and performance capabilities of the equipment and the buyer will be expected to attend these meetings to make sure the DO does not 'gild the lily' with the product and increase the price out of range of the budget.

Parts Manufacture
The many parts that make up a locomotive or car body shell will be made in a machine shop(s) either at the manufacturer's plant or be contracted out to sub-suppliers. These parts may be structural members, ribs, bolsters or panels. It is important that the DO designs parts in such a way that they are easy to make and of materials which can be processed by the factory with its existing equipment. It is also important that the parts can be easily assembled to form the vehicle as it progresses through the manufacturing process. The cost of many vehicles has soared because the design of parts has caused trouble for the assembly process by being too complex, too tight tolerances, or too difficult to handle. Curved shapes are the worst and roofing the most vulnerable to such problems.




Arquivo 081 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Underframe
Once sufficient parts have been manufactured separately, they are brought together for assembly in a jig. The underframe is usually the first part of the bodyshell to be built and its principle parts will include, sole bars, runners, bolsters, and transoms.
An important feature of the manufacture of the traditional underframe is the provision of a camber.  This is the 'bowing' of the frame along the longitudinal length upward from the ends to the centre. The camber is important because, as all the other structures are added to the underframe, the weight obviously increases. If there was no camber, the resulting car shell would sag in the middle.  To see how this works, look at the trailer of an articulated truck that you see on the road and observe the upward bow. 
Sides

Similarly to the underframe, the various parts of the vehicle side will be brought together in a series of jigs for assembly and welding.  If it is a car body that is being manufactured, the windows can either be cut out of the bodyside panels or the sides will be assembled in sections with the window frames (called pans) already installed. 

The most difficult aspect of side manufacture is getting an acceptable degree of flatness whilst keeping the weight of the bodyshell within reasonable bounds. Welding the panels to the frame often causes rippling of the panel due to distortion by the heating of the welding process. Clamping the skin under tension can help but post welding straightening is often necessary. Aluminium double skinned body construction has helped with this problem but welding produces heat and this must be managed carefully in both design and construction phases.
Pre-Assembly
In some Bombardier factories, the underframe, sides, ends and roof of the car are pre-assembled with insulation, ducting, wiring piping and fixings before being brought together in the car body erection area. The sections are pre-painted and some are lined too. The sections are then huck bolted together.

The process can be viewed in a series of photos here. For a mechanically fastened body, the roof goes through much the same process as the underframe or sides.  Although there will probably be less items involved than, say, the underframe, the curved shape of the roof will require a jig to form the contour.  This will be complicated if it is a ribbed section and will probably need holes cut out to accommodate vents, HVAC and ducting.  The first roof is always difficult to assemble, since the jig has to be just right as well as all the parts making up the roof itself.  Once assembled, the roof may be inverted for the fitting of ducting or wiring.
Bodyshell Assembly 

The alternative system used by Bombardier for bodyshell assembly is to manufacture the body parts and partially fit them out before erection. The video in Figure n shows a time lapse for the process.




Arquivo 082 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Steel Body Finishing

When the welding is finished on a traditionally made bodyshell, the completed shell is moved to an inspection and straightening jig.  This is where it can get interesting, watching the craftsmen using their skills to straighten the sides. As we have seen, the sides will usually show ripples on the skin due to the tolerance generated during assembly and the expansive effects of welding.  At the same time, grinding of the welds will take place to smooth any rough edges.

Straightening may involve using a large hammer with a blow torch to heat the skin (heat and beat), or it may employ a more sophisticated method such as attaching a magnetic panel (contoured to suit the shape of the body) to the outside of the skin and a thick panel to the inside, using the magnet as shown below. This 'thick' panel will have a series of equally spaced holes through which heat is applied using a multi-nozzle blow torch. The heat applied has the effect of stretching the skin of the body, due to the spot heating, causing the panels to straighten. Vacuum clamping is also sometimes used. 

It will be dependent on whether the car has a stainless steel or low alloy, high tensile steel body as to the method used for straightening.  It is virtually impossible to straighten a car body which is required to have an unpainted stainless steel finish. In one respect, aluminium is a better material to use for car body assembly.  It is light enough that it can be supplied in thicker sheets, which don't buckle during assembly.  The straightening process is therefore eliminated.  However, it is more expensive than stainless steel and has a lower strength. 

Underframe Invert

We have seen how the underframe may be turned over or inverted at several stages during its manufacture.  As the underframe will eventually carry all sorts of equipment, various brackets, pipes and cable runs need to be attached and, to fit them from underneath is a backbreaking and slow task.  To make it easier, once the underframe is substantially complete and before it has the car sides and ends attached, it is inverted again and the extra brackets are welded on and pipes, conduit and air reservoirs bolted or welded on.  

Ends

The modern train will often be designed to have an aerodynamically smooth front end.  However, certain crashworthiness standards are necessary, so some protective structure will be needed as well. The usual solution is to construct a steel framework  and then mount the smooth, shaped end over it. To achieve the three dimensional curved shape in steel or aluminium is difficult - although the Germans seem to have done it (doubtless at great expense) in their high speed ICE trains - so most manufacturers often use a glass reinforced plastic (GRP) moulding. There are normally made by specialist producers, since the process requires skill, special materials, proper environmental protection systems and careful quality control. 

Modern assembly methods include building separate car ends. These are prepared in their own area and then added to the main bodyshell at a later stage in the erection process. This can be useful for cab ends, when they can be tested separately before joining to the main body.
Painting
For some years after World War II, it became fashionable to produce car bodies without painting them.  This saved labour and weight and seemed, at the time, to have an acceptable finish. When graffiti began to appear is the US in the late 1970s and in Europe in the early 1980s, it was found that the unpainted bodies were very difficult to keep clean. Attempts to remove the graffiti paint left ingrained marks. Often car bodies became severely damaged. In some cases, cars were painted to try to improve the appearance. The paint used was a special two-pack mixture which was supposed to harden to a graffiti resistant finish.  Nowadays, painting for trains has become the norm again and some interesting colour schemes have resulted. A car builder will need to have a fully equipped paint shop and drying facility, together with all the necessary fume extraction and fire protection equipment.

Transport
An important part of the manufacturing process is how to move things around the works.  Modern railway vehicles contain long sections of lightweight materials which, for example, need to be moved from the rolling mill to the welding jig.  A 24 metre long steel section needs careful handling if it is not to be ruined by accidental bending while being swung from one side of the shop to the other.

It is worth mentioning here that a railway vehicle factory can be a very large place. If you say that a site requires one square kilometre of land, you would be in the right ball park - well, a very big ball park. This means that you have to move things around during manufacture. Very often, large parts, like underframes and roofs are made on jigs in a large shop and moved through assembly jigs to a final assembly jig. Moving a stainless steel roof 24 metres (65 ft) long is difficult because the roof will flex.  Secure cradles need to be designed to protect parts which have to be lifted or moved from one area to another. Cranes will be required in all the shops. Overhead bridge cranes are the traditional type used for the larger items like this and a big shop will need at least two.

Another problem area is fixing bolts protruding from items shipped into the factory from a sub-supplier. These will be damaged if not properly protected and handled.




Arquivo 083 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Bogie Construction
Bogies run from the very simple cast steel design (such as the traditional US three-piece freight bogie which is basically a pair of side frames and a bolster - see Bogies on this site) to very complicated fabricated designs with steel spring primary suspension, air bag secondary suspensions and both tread brakes and discs. Many decisions have to be taken in selecting the bogie appropriate for the role. Besides the suspension system and brakes, it is necessary to decide whether to use inside or outside bearings, solid or hollow axles, and to choose the wheel diameter and tread profile. 

Looking at a fabricated passenger vehicle bogie to explain the manufacturing process, the various parts that make up the side frames are assembled in a rotating jig and welded together and then moved to a new jig where the bolster or transom, depending on the type of bogie, will be welded in place. 
It is very important to have the "tram" of the bogie correct - that is the diagonal measurements taken from corner to corner - and special measuring equipment will be used to ensure the bogie frame is within tolerance before final welding takes place.  Once the frame is manufactured, it is painted and then the externally mounted parts will be added.

Wheels and Axles
Normally, wheels and axles are bought as completed items and only need a minimal amount of machining work for assembly.  The wheels will need to have the centres bored to suit the axle end diameter.  This will be carried out on a wheel boring machine, which is a very big vertical borer with the wheel held in a large chuck.  Once this task is complete, the wheel is taken to a wheel and axle press. This is a large horizontal press where the various items that make up the wheel and axle assembly will be pressed onto the axle. 

Besides the wheels, there may be brake disc centres, inside or outside bearings and gear wheels.  Each of these items will be pressed on in turn.  The fit is an "interference fit" and often there is an oil plug in the wheel to allow the injection of oil to assist in the pressing process.  The oil is injected between the wheel and the axle to lubricate the mating surfaces during the pressing process.

Not really applicable to this description but included for interest is that for removal of wheels there is often an oil plug in the wheel to allow the injection of oil to assist in the demounting process.  The oil is injected between the wheel and the axle to lubricate the mating surfaces during the removal process.

During assembly, records will be kept of the pressing process just in case there is a problem with the wheelset in the future.  It is important during this stage to maintain the correct dimensions for the 'back-to-back' gauge.  This is the measurement between the back face of the wheel flanges and it is necessary to ensure the correct fit is achieved otherwise there would be serious and embarrassing consequences when the completed vehicle is placed on the track. 

After pressing, the wheelset is transferred to a portal lathe where the wheel treads will be machined to ensure consistency of diameter between the two wheels.  This does not apply to all assembly processes and will be dependant on the type of vehicle being manufactured.  It is, however, very important on vehicles that use a mono-motor bogie design where high torque can occur on curves due to mis-matched wheel diameters.

Bogie Assembly
Bogie assembly now begins in earnest. If the suspension has chevrons, these will be the first items to be connected, if the suspension is using coil springs then that will be one of the last steps as the wheelsets are added. Next comes the air pipes, followed by the brake rigging, then the wiring and finally the wheelsets, culminating with the completed bogie undergoing a load test, which will ensure that the suspension is installed correctly and the bogie is functioning as designed. The steps described here could be in a different order depending on which item makes logical sense in the sequence, or to the particular bogie manufacturer's preference.

If the bogies have electric motors and gears fitted, it is important to get the parts fitted with the correct tolerances.  It takes a high degree of skill to set up the traction gearing when fitting a motor so that there is not too much or too little "give" between the gear teeth. This is referred to as a "backlash test”.






Arquivo 084 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Wiring

There can be a considerable amount of wire in a rail vehicle and it is important to ensure that the wires are all running from point to point along the most economical route.  At the same time, to make life easier for the maintenance department, all wires should run as close together as possible.  The only exception to this is that high voltage wiring will be kept away from communications wiring or safety sensitive cables.  Wiring is assembled in looms off of the vehicle; in fact, very often, wiring looms are a contracted out item.  On modern rolling stock where more consideration has gone into the maintainability of the vehicle, a cable tray arrangement will be used to run the length of the vehicle with arms extended out at convenient locations along the main tray (see the picture below).  The wires will be colour coded and/or numbered at regular spacing along the loom, or tray, to ensure the wire is identifiable for connection during assembly or replacement during the life of the vehicle.

Piping

Similarly to the wiring there can be a considerable amount of piping on a vehicle and it can be advantageous to assemble some of the runs of the piping away from the vehicle.  This will be performed in the pipe shop (where else?), where the lengths of pipe will be cut, threaded on the ends and connectors applied to suit, maybe with a few off-shoots (branches), as required.  These will then be delivered to vehicles for installation, either during underframe invert or in the fitting out shop.

Fitting Out
Once the body shell is complete, our vehicle is sent to another shop for fitting out.  In steam locomotive days, this was known as the "Erecting Shop" and there are still some workshops where the name has stuck.  It may pay a visit to the paint shop first or, as is increasingly common, some of the bodyshell parts may have been painted before assembly - depending on the method, of course.  

You could say it is starting to get interesting now.  At last our vehicle will start to look like a piece of rolling stock. While it is in the fitting out area, it will move from station to station to receive the various fittings that make it a complete vehicle.  Of course, not all manufacturers follow the same format for assembly but the following description is a typical method for final assembly of a vehicle.   Equipment may not necessarily be installed in this order, although you will observe there is a fairly logical progression.

Bodyshells will line the shop sides running longitudinally through the shop. In the first station area there will be an opportunity to weld on the secondary structures (mostly brackets) that the DO has found necessary but did not have sufficient information available when completing the design to include during manufacture in the bodyshell shop.  Secondary structure is used to attach interior equipment panels or the body linings.  At this stage, any interior insulation to go into the walls, roof or floor will be installed along with any hidden wiring or piping.  It is also a good time to hang the doors and door gear as there is minimal other equipment around to interfere with the installation. Whilst this is going on inside, underfloor equipment can be welded or bolted on below the bodyshell, unless the "invert" method of assembly has been adopted.  Dependant on what type of vehicle is being manufactured, this stage will include battery boxes, low voltage power supplies, chemical toilet retention tanks, brake resistors, HVAC and brake equipment, to list but a few.

At the second station, wiring will commence in earnest with the installation of control cubicles and electrical boxes and possibly the driver's compartment equipment and lighting.  Moving on, we will next see the installation of windows, gangway connections, interior panels and flooring (which may be a vinyl or carpeting).  From now on, care has to be taken not to dirty the interior, so protective covering will be installed.  At this point, handrails and maybe the seats will be installed.  If the HVAC unit is roof mounted, this may now be craned in and installed.  If we now have everything complete, we may now install our roof lining.  Outside, the coupler will be installed and our piece of rolling stock is almost complete. 

Now we are nearing the end and the car will be lifted on to its bogies and electrical and mechanical connections made.  At this point, there will be a final check through the vehicle and clean out remaining debris.  Once this is done, the vehicle is handed over to the testing department to complete all the integration tests described below.

Final cleaning and removal of protective covers will not take place until all the testing, and probably the commissioning, has been completed.  Too early removal of protective covers leads to possible claims from the customer for scuffing or ingrained dirt and subsequent costly rectification by the manufacturer.

Assembly Methods - Lift or Roll?
Two different systems are used for vehicle fitting out. The older system has each unit in production standing in a fixed place with the equipment brought to it until all is installed.  When all work and some basic testing is done, the unit is lifted up and over the other vehicles to where it will be landed on its bogies.  Its bogies are "plumbed in" and it is then towed out to a test bay for the required verification tests.  The space left by its lift is filled by another body shell unit which go through the same process until fully fitted out.

The other system adopts the rolling production line system, where each unit is passed through the shop in a set sequence, beginning at the entrance to the shop and finishing at the exit as we saw above.  Sometimes, two or three lines might be created, so that a unit will pass down the shop on the first line, back up on the second and down again on the third.  The advantage of this system is that all vehicles must be kept on the move to ensure production continues smoothly.  If a problem arises, it must be fixed quickly, otherwise the whole production line is delayed.  It encourages people to get things done.  However, it may make people rush and it does require strict quality control, otherwise, units show up a lot of problems during testing and a whole team has to be kept in the test bay doing rectification work.

The static method solves these problems but it can lead to a unit with a problem staying in the shop long after it is due to leave.  People tend to get on with other things and leave the difficult one waiting for a spare part.  This system also requires a workshop with sufficient height clearance to allow a complete vehicle to be lifted over the others in the shop.  Nowadays, the production line method is the more popular.

Locomotive Assembly
The assembly process described above relates to multiple unit passenger trains.  Locomotives are somewhat different but only as far as the procedure for the installation of equipment.  Usually, the diesel engine, alternators, inverter units, blowers, compressors and other large items are lowered through the roof of the locomotive.  This means that the roof will be one of the last items to be fitted.  It is often arranged to be mounted in sections so that it can easily be removed for maintenance access.






Arquivo 085 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/rolling-stock-manufacture.html

Testing
It is fairly obvious that, once the train starts coming together, testing will start but, in reality, it starts a lot earlier in the manufacturing process.  An example is the combined test, where the propulsion kit is all laid out on the lab floor, including converters, motors, gearboxes, control system and even the ATP and ATO.  The motors link into dynamometers which can also be set to motor, i.e. to simulate the kinetic energy of the train during downhill running or braking.  The dynamometer excitation is controlled by a computer that is programmed to simulate the real load cycle of the railway on which the train will be used, though in the case of the Docklands Light Railway (London) traction equipment combined test at Preston, there was a range of "site data" available, from the Sishen-Sadhana ore line to the TGV SudOuest.  Alstom went even further on the Eurostar, when they set up a whole train's worth of "informatique". 

The obvious advantage of combined test is that a lot of the interface and software debugging is done long before the train starts to appear on the shop floor.  The "informatique" and propulsion hardware is less of a long lead item than the rest, yet the debugging can be even more painful than getting a Stanier "Jubilee" to steam freely.  And, even if motors and gearboxes take longer to arrive than the propulsion cases, the latter can drive into dummy loads for the time being. 

Before a unit of rolling stock is accepted by the customer, there will be many formal tests to be performed.  Each piece of equipment will be tested, before assembly into the train, first at the particular subcontractor's plant.  This is usually referred to as a First Article Inspection (FAI) and will involve an inspector comparing the specification and drawings to the actual product in front of him.  In the majority of cases, the piece of equipment will receive some form of dynamic test.  This, for instance, could involve operating a gearbox on a test rig to verify it works correctly or maintains the correct temperature for the oil.  If it is an electrical/electronic item, tests for continuity or breaker tripping and so on will be performed.
Once all the FAI tests have been completed and passed as satisfactory on a particular item, the equipment can be sent to the vehicle builder for installation.  When the rolling stock has been assembled, another series of tests will verify that the equipment functions as intended.  There are both dynamic and static tests.  Static tests will be used to verify such areas as the EMI (electro-magnetic interference) emissions or Hi-Pot testing or could be as mundane as testing the functioning of the lights or the raising and lowering of a pantograph.  Some tests will seem mundane and will just be proving that lights work or the windshield wipers are working.  Others have a more important function and will ensure that the wiring is correct through the vehicle or trainset, called trainline testing.  If we are testing the cab controls then the power lever and the braking will be tested along with forward and reverse.  All the warning and information lights will be checked for correct operation.  Back in the vehicle tests will be carried out to prove the HVAC system is functioning correctly and heating and cooling as it is supposed to do.  Also, if power is lost from the main supply, a test will ensure that the emergency back-up battery works and that power load is reduced by shedding over a set period of time to reduce the load requirement and, hence, current draw on the battery.  Every piece of equipment will be tested on each piece of rolling stock and witnessed and approved by an Inspector appointed by the customer, before the rolling stock moves onto the next segment of the acceptance cycle, which is commissioning.

Commissioning
All the tests have been completed and approved and now comes the interesting part, where the rolling stock is commissioned, usually on the customer's property.  If it is a new piece of rolling stock or a trainset there will be a set of tests required called a performance evaluation.  These tests will be used by the supplier to prove to the customer that what he is getting is, in fact, what he ordered.  When the order was first placed, probably the first one or two items of rolling stock (or trainsets) would have been designated as prototypes or pre-production units.  The intent here is to prove everything is in order before the supplier commences production of the remainder of the fleet. 

Commissioning tests will prove that all the pieces of equipment the supplier has purchased from the multitude of sub-suppliers have been integrated correctly and 'talk' to each other.  It is obviously important that when the train driver issues a command, through his master controller, say to slow down, that the brakes apply and at the same time the propulsion system is not trying to accelerate the train.  Oh yes, it has happened!  

Dynamic tests will be used to prove the acceleration and deceleration tests meet the specification performance criteria.  Some contracts include an endurance or "burn-in" test when the vehicle will be tested and required to achieve a number of kilometres without a failure.  If a failure occurs in this time the clock is stopped and the testing starts all over again.  This arrangement is popular in the US.

Delivery
Delivery (in a contractual sense) occurs in two stages at two defined times.  The first time occurs when the rolling stock is 'pushed out gate' which means, if the supplier is delivering by rail, pushing the train through the gate separating their property from the railway's.  Nowadays, most deliveries occur by road, as manufacturers have such diverse customers, not just in their own country but around the world.  Prior to this there is usually a ceremony where the manufacturer will hand over a key (for the master controller) or some significant symbol to the customer noting the delivery of the first item of his order.  As each vehicle or train is shipped out and signed for by the customer, the contract has reached "substantial completion" for this unit.

Vehicles being shipped by road or sea (even by air sometimes), need to be packed properly. It is usual to ship bodies and bogies separately. If the shipping involves a sea passage, careful protection is required for the body and parts vulnerable to damage by seawater or just the salty atmosphere. 

Bogies are packed so that the vibration of the suspension does not create wear. The shipping process invariably involves craneage and it is essential to ensure the docks know how to handle railway vehicles, which are very difficult to load on and off ships without damage.

The delivery route must be surveyed to ensure that there are no obstructions. Often telephone or electricity cables are vulnerable and they are seldom in the places where the authorities think they are. A route plan may show where everything should be but there is no substitute for a thorough visual survey. Of course, permission and assistance will have to be sought from the local police. If traffic conditions require it, moves many have to be made at night.

Once the equipment has arrived on the customer's property, final commissioning takes place. The second delivery stage, mentioned earlier, begins at the end of the commissioning when all tests have been signed as 'passed' and the customer is satisfied that he is getting what he paid for. This delivery usually occurs at the customer's maintenance facility and signifies that the rolling stock is ready for revenue service. Now the warranty clock begins to tick.





Arquivo 086 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/light-rail-systems.html

Horse omnibuses came into existence in the first half of the 19th century, when the world’s major cities began to grow beyond a size where any destination could be reached easily on foot in about an hour. However, horse omnibuses were uncomfortable and had limited capacity, due to the poor road surfaces. The operators had to charge relatively high fares because they had to cover the cost of the two or more horses required to haul the coaches. Between 1850 and 1880, recognising the importance of faster and more efficient local transport and the advantages of the steel wheel on steel rail, entrepreneurs and the municipalities themselves started to build basic street railways, modelled on the tramroads that had emerged in the 17th and 18th century for the carriage of freight. Early trams, as the vehicles came to be known, were hauled by horses and, in some cases, small enclosed steam locomotives or underground cables. Over the years, Berlin, London, Paris, New York and many other major cities rapidly developed large networks of animal, steam and cable hauled tramways.

The cost of horses, with feed, shoeing dung removal and the need to have at least two or three teams to provide an all-day service by each coach led to systems being electrified from 1890 onwards. 
Electrification provided lower running costs and improved performance and quickly, electric tramways were built around the globe, often by American and European commercial interests, with time limited concessions. However, many of the smaller networks were abandoned in the 1920s when the concessions expired while others were taken over by the local municipalities. Most of the major international conurbations had abandoned their tramway networks by the 1960s because of the need to renew track and electric systems. They were encouraged by the lower cost of diesel fuel and tramways were replaced by trolley-buses and motor buses.

Tramways became popular again in the 1980s, both in Europe and the United States of America. In the USA they reappeared as Light Rapid Transit, an affordable system of medium capacity, fast urban transport that suited the relatively low density of many American conurbations better than metros of the type built for New York City, Chicago and Washington DC. In Europe, the terms Light Rail and Light Rail Transit were adopted in some cases to differentiate the new systems from the long established tramway with its reliance on sharing most of the alignment with road transport. The terms tramway, light rapid transit and light rail are often used interchangeably.

Planning

Whatever the terminology used, the requirements for building new street running railways are now far more demanding than those that were in place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The planning phase of modern systems often exceeds 10 years from concept to opening. Usually, a project starts with a feasibility study.






Arquivo 087 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/light-rail-systems.html

A feasibility study is an essential first step in any tramway construction project. Any stakeholder or consideration neglected in this phase may result in major flaws in the system and bears the risk of investing public funds in a venture that is rejected by the potential users. To ensure the economic viability and sustainability of a tramway system, a successful feasibility study must identify correctly the areas with the optimum population in terms of size and ability to pay fares, the possible commuting demand and the potential for the creation of strategic transport links. 

The main concept for a successful network should be to link three main types of zones, including central business districts, residential areas and the main public transport hubs, such as railway stations, bus stations and airports. The layout and location of each area, the passenger flows between them and economic justification are the main parameters that can will affect the network planning process. The key to reaching the required passenger flows is the correct identification of areas and creating viable links between them. Another key factor for a successful feasibility study is a determination of the possible contribution that the tramway network might make to urban regeneration. Nottingham and Sheffield are examples for this. Following the success of the first phase of the Nottingham Express Transit (NET) system, the second phase is now adding to the contribution that the tram system makes to the Greater Nottingham economy and its social fabric. Some of the benefits of a well-planned light rail system can be:

Significant financial benefits for local companies involved in construction contracts;
Employment of hundreds of local people;
Growth in employment, potentially creating 8,000 jobs;
New investment in the city region with a value of £300m annually;
Contribution to an integrated public transport system for Greater Nottingham;
Facilitation of modal shift from private cars to public transport;
Improved access to about 1270 out of 55,000 work places in the city;
Greater integration with road transport leading to reduced congestion and lower carbon emissions.
The foundation for predicting reliable levels of passenger flows is the proper identification of areas to be served by a new system, with data generated from linking traffic zones presented in an origin/destination matrix. This matrix can potentially include information on all types of travel by various modes but tramway network planners tend to focus on transfer from car travel. This is because the car reflects the most convenient and demanding mode and the highest passenger volume and it helps the planners to be on the safe side. The approach also helps the planners to get the data for potential trips within allocated traffic zones with high passenger demand. Also, planners have to convince promoters that there will be enough passenger volume by demonstrating that they have chosen the best routes and alignments. The planners must be aware of passenger flow variations that can be categorised into seasonal, daily and hourly flows. They must allow for occasional markets, seasonal events, seasonal jobs and that university teaching periods and vacations can affect the number of trips and passenger flows. 

Routes

Undoubtedly, route selection and alignment are important steps in the process of building a new tramway. Route design can profoundly affect the time and cost of the project and can impact on the vehicle design, system safety and traffic management. During the feasibility phase, planners should take into consideration the possibility of using existing alignments. This is usually one of the best solutions to address financial and environmental issues and will lead to savings in cost and time in many situations.
The designs for a right of way for a tramway can be mixed, depending on the street layouts of the area to be served, the traffic patterns and the safety requirements. Tramway alignment types can be described as: Segregated, Separated and Integrated. A segregated route is one which is completely protected from interaction with roads, cars and other traffic (Figure 3). This type of alignment is mostly applicable to situations where tramways or light railways are built on land that is not alongside existing roads and other transport infrastructure. It could even be built on former railway routes, such as in Croydon, England. A separated route is a type of tram alignment where the tram track is separated from other traffic by a fence or kerb but adjacent to the carriageway. This arrangement is often referred to as segregated on-street running.

An integrated alignment is a type of route that partially or totally shares the road with other traffic modes such as buses, cycles, motor cycles, cars and trucks (Figure 2). Not unreasonably, planners are keen to design segregated routes wherever possible, since this potentially avoids a number of safety issues, complicated traffic management plans, specific signalling equipment and, to some extent, extra time and cost in the construction process. But there are  some inevitable factors that get in the way of designing segregated routes like topography, street alignments, historical buildings or political and legal restrictions and these make the design of tramway systems in city centres a big challenge. There is also the big issues of the requirement to move utilities, especially those that are not mapped or that appear during construction.








Arquivo 088 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/light-rail-systems.html

Construction

There is no doubt that construction of a new urban tramway is going to be disruptive and it is important that the project team takes the time and effort to make people and businesses aware of what is to happen and to mitigate the inconvenience as far as possible. At the beginning of the construction of each section of track, installing barriers and blocking some of the pathways are inevitable. Depending on the location of each individual business, the nature of the business and the income and the number of customers of each business, blocking the access affects the business to a greater or lesser extent. For example, some small takeaway shops that have only a small number of customers tend to be at risk of losing all of them. 
The construction process will include ground excavation, demolition and noise as utilities are moved and track laid. The noise and vibration can transfer to the surrounding buildings and in some cases, offices overlooking the works have had to be abandoned. For large businesses, deliveries often arrive on a daily basis and road closures during tramway works can seriously affect access. It may be necessary to find an alternative route along parallel streets to provide truck access and for rubbish collections. This process requires precise traffic management and, in some sections, variable traffic management systems may be required. Implementing such systems will require lengthy risk and safety assessments and approval processes and these will result in higher costs and longer timescales for the project. 

Experience has shown that, in cities like Birmingham and Nottingham, the approvals process profoundly affects the management of the project and its cost and time budgets. In some projects, the contractor had to split the track construction into separate sub-sections. This had the potential to affect the quality, integrity and resource allocation strategy of the project. It also led to problems for people and local businesses because of multiple changes to the delivery and access routes and their effects on traffic management. It is essential that a comprehensive study is carried out prior to starting the construction of a tramway in a city centre to determine the consequences of the construction process and the priorities of track development in order to achieve the optimum traffic management, utility diversion and mitigation of environmental impacts, such as noise and vibration.

Track

The choice of track system and its design will be an important part of the system design process. The interface between track and vehicle is influenced by a range of factors. According to the US Transportation Research Board (TRB, 2012), in specifying a tramcar, the following requirements must be taken into account:

Weight of vehicle in both empty and fully loaded condition;
Clearance issues including required track-platform location tolerance, clearance between cars and adjacent tracks, car dynamics, clearance for bridges, tunnels etc.;
Gap between vehicle door sill and platform edge that affects wheelchair access;
Wheel dimensions including the tyre profile, wheel diameter, gauge and back to back gauge;
Lateral component of vehicle forces on track;
Longitudinal vehicle/track interaction forces.
Track geometry and curve radius and length will directly impact the choice of tramway vehicles and their design. The most important parameter in track design is consistency so the same standards should be applied across the network. 

It should be noted that the form of track potentially affects the clearance envelope. For instance, ballasted track can drift during its life-cycle and this can affect the kinematic envelope. All track, vehicle and control system designs should be coordinated from the first stage of design. A good approach is to produce a comprehensive manual for design criteria and then update the manual by adding information as the project progresses. 





Arquivo 089 - http://www.railway-technical.com/trains/light-rail-systems.html


Electrification

In the UK, the ORR (Office of Rail & Road) is responsible for regulating all types of rail systems. For tramway electrification, the ORR has some provisions and guidelines that must be followed by developers. In Britain, tramways are generally supplied with electric traction power via overhead lines. The maximum allowed voltage on public roadways is 750 V DC. Different voltages might be permitted in special cases, subject to technical and safety agreements but AC power supply is normally not permitted for on-street systems. Overhead lines require support structures along the route where the electrification equipment cannot be suspended from roadside buildings. These structures and the associated overhead electric traction equipment require careful siting to avoid hindering traffic on the streets and at the same time they need to be safe from possible damage by road vehicles. Different types of poles are used to support the overhead wires, according to location and local conditions. The designs should be carefully chosen to provide the necessary support whilst not being intrusively ugly. 

The designs of poles should at least provide protection against climbing and must be secured against vandalism. The poles in public areas must be insulated properly and there must be provision for electrical protection in case of pole failure. Minimising the vulnerability of any single supporting equipment or pole needs to be a major goal of the design since the collapse of any single support can potentially impose excess tension in the overhead line system. The design must be able to prevent live equipment from dropping lower than 5200 mm above the road . In the case of off-highway rights of way, the limit can be lower but only if it is safely out of reach of pedestrians. Connections between the pole and the contact wire must be physically weaker than the contact wire to guarantee that in case of a pole being damaged or collapsing, the connection will break before the live equipment is pulled down.

Electrical Protection

The design of any electric traction power supply system must guarantee that the maximum touch voltages do not surpass 60 volts. Since the positioning of electrical sub-stations can be potentially significant, minimising the return resistance by the use of sufficient rail section or additional return current conductors must be taken into account. Higher voltages might be permitted in low-risk areas, subject to specific inspections and considerations but access by the public is always a concern.

Isolating switches must be located so as to give the operators effective and efficient control of the power supply system, even in emergency conditions. The switches must be protected from intrusion by unauthorised persons and located without creating any kind of hazard. Isolators are best  positioned in secure trackside cupboards. Where switches are mounted on trackside poles, sufficient protection must be in place. There should be adequate signage to inform people to keep away from live parts. Staff must be trained to use this equipment safely, bearing in mind the public arena. In some areas, depending upon the owners’ consent and safety requirements, electric overhead lines or equipment might be mounted on the roof or walls of adjacent buildings. In these cases, the proximity of the buildings to the equipment, the location of windows and the possibility of touching equipment during cleaning activities must all be considered carefully with a view to ensuring safety.

Stray Current Management

The design of the electrical supply system must take into account the need to minimise stray current. In understanding the process, we may consider the load model for a tramway power supply as consisting of the substation from which the direct current  at the selected nominal voltage for the line is supplied, the positive conductor (the overhead line) connecting the supply to the trams, the load (the tram cars) and the negative conductor over which the current is returned to the substations. According to Ohm’s law, in any conductor the passage of an electrical current will result in a voltage drop along its length, proportional to the resistivity of the conductor. As a result of this phenomenon, sections of the rails will be at a voltage, which is different from that of other equipment buried in the earth, such as metal pipes and cables and urban utilities.
The impact of stray currents on buried metal objects is known as electrolytic corrosion. This mostly results in loss of material. Undoubtedly this is an unwanted phenomenon in locations where metal pipes carry gas or water, since leakage and rupture will impose very significant safety and operational risks to the tramway, people and the environment. With regard to utility cables, especially old lead covered types, such losses arise even more quickly and can lead to failure of the unprotected inner insulation of the cable. It is important that utility companies and other organisations which own equipment buried in the ground beneath the track, accept that, even with a proper design and satisfying all the requirements, there would still be some leakage. Hence the buried equipment and devices must be protected properly. Constant monitoring and maintenance are key factors to assure control and mitigation of return current losses. To begin with, a stray current strategy must be implemented at the very start of the project planning stage. The most important steps in this strategy are:

Agreement on the establishment of a register of vulnerable assets.
Awareness of programmes where the utility companies replace the cladding of equipment currently metal with plastic or similar, therefore reducing the range and extent of vulnerable devices;
Agreements on the level of testing of measures to mitigate stray current throughout the construction phase of the system;
Agreements on the level of monitoring of change in these measures during the operational phase of the system;
Appraisal of the outcomes of testing during construction;
Investigating the issues as they arise during the operational phase of the system;
There must be regular meetings with stakeholders, legal bodies, constructors and companies during the construction phase. In the operation phase these meetings can be less frequent but must still take place regularly to monitor stray current performance.
Conclusions

The experience gained in recent years from new tramway designs in the UK and elsewhere leaves no doubt that careful planning both in the design and construction phases of a tramway project is essential if the system is to be delivered to specification and within the time and budget agreed. Regular communication with stakeholders is vital in ensuring compliance with requirements and with obtaining a satisfactory period of construction with a minimum of disruption and delay. A step by step approach is always a good way towards reaching the ultimate goal of a well run and successful project.





Arquivo 090 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/railway-finance.html

Since the mid 1990s, railways across the world have "gone commercial", with various models of privatisation and public-private partnerships (PPPs) or private finance initiatives (PFIs). This article is a simple guide on how a new railway might be financed and a review of the limitations of privatisation and private sector participation in the ownership and operation of railway systems.  Numbers are taken from known examples but are only for illustration and should not be considered binding. 

A word of caution. Published costs are often difficult to evaluate. Some costs are released to the press in a form that either exaggerates the total or minimises it according to the spin that the press release wants to put on the message. Even government issued figures cannot be guaranteed to be clear on what is included or excluded. For example, the costs of consultants hired by the government to advise on the project may not be included in the price
How Much Does a Railway Cost?
A difficult question! This is a bit like asking how much does a car cost.  It depends on whether you want a Mercedes or a Honda, a sports car or a pick-up, a car to do the shopping in or to move furniture with.  It also depends on where you buy it. Cars are cheap in the US because there is a huge market and a good economy. Cars are expensive in Singapore because many of them are imported and there is a high taxation penalty to control traffic numbers. Cars are expensive to build in Europe but cheap to build in India because of the differences in labour costs and lower engineering requirements. 

It is the same with railways. A single track freight line with a few locomotives and simple signalling, running across a flat, geologically sound, sparsely populated landscape in a developing country might be built for as little as US$ 2 million per kilometre including electrical and mechanical equipment. A double track underground metro line in a densely populated city with difficult geological conditions, requiring anti-earthquake construction techniques, electric traction, immunity from typhoons and high humidity, high technology specifications and high passenger capacity trains could cost US$ 300 million a kilometre.  One of the most expensive railways ever built is Crossrail in London.  The 26 kms of tunnelling is complete (2016) and the system is in the fitting out stage and is due to open at the end of 2018. This route cost US$600 million a kilometre because of difficult civil engineering, its large and finely built stations, the need to link into existing underground stations, its modern (and expensive) safety equipment and its financing costs.  You pays your money and you takes your choice.




Arquivo 091 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/railway-finance.html

he rolling stock costs show how prices can vary with design requirements, number ordered and location.  World-wide, new locomotive prices vary between US$ 2 million and US$ 6 million. LRV prices are generally higher than EMU car prices because the vehicles are often articulated and consist of a number of body sections. Also, bear in mind that published prices do not include the cost to the purchaser of obtaining finance, drawing up a specification and tendering costs.

It is interesting to note that regarding their Paris RER MI09 order for 650 vehicles, Alstom reported that the contract (joint with Bombardier) was signed in April 2009 and that the first car body went into the paint shop in January 2010. They say that the first vehicle spent about five months being fitted out and then went for car tests in August. The first 5-car trainset went for testing in early October 2010. It will take from then until the end of 2011 to get the first train into revenue service. So, it takes 16 months to build a train and then 12 months to test it and get it carrying passengers. Does that seem right?
Government Participation
The reason why governments are forced to provide public services is because the private sector doesn't want to.  The private sector doesn't want to because there's not enough money to be made from the enterprise or because the commercial risks are too high - really the same thing.  In  the case of education, for example, it is a generally agreed social objective that everyone should have access to affordable education but affordable education for everyone is not commercially viable.  The costs of the infrastructure and operation of a school are high and most ordinary people could not afford to pay for it at a commercial rate.  Those who can, pay substantial fees and private schools can thus make a profit.  Health care is another example where the public sector is forced to provide facilities to make hospital services available for everyone.  Private health care is available but it is expensive if you have to pay for it.  In many countries, employers are covering costs by providing health care insurance.

The same situation exists for railways.  The infrastructure is very expensive (as we can see from the above tables) and the amount of money ordinary people are able to pay in fares is not enough to repay the costs of building and maintaining the lines.  In many cases, as discussed below, there isn't even enough money coming from fares to pay for the day-to-day operating costs like energy bills and staff wages.  The government therefore has to cover the shortfall.  They must provide the infrastructure, or at least help to provide it, and support the operations and maintenance costs.  The government pays for these costs out of taxes.

In recent times, the desire for improved public infrastructure and facilities has clashed with the willingness of citizens to pay high taxes.  Frequent stories of waste and misuse of taxpayers money by governments have fuelled a justifiable resistance to paying more taxes into a government "black hole" which seems to have little real public accountability.  The political result of this has been that governments have not increased taxes for fear of alienating their voters and thus have not been able to improve public facilities like hospital, schools, roads and railways due to the shortage of cash.  In some cases they have not even been able to maintain them to a reasonable standard.

Commercial Participation
In recent years, in attempts to overcome the perceived inefficiencies of public financial management, governments have turned to the private commercial sector for financing.  In some cases, government owned utilities have been sold to the private sector, usually at very attractive prices in order to attract purchasers who may have to spend a lot of money restructuring the organisation to make it into a profitable business.   Telecommunications, power supply and airlines are all areas which governments have sold into private ownership and which have eventually become profitable.  Railways are more difficult to sell since they have high infrastructure and maintenance costs and the income from operations is artificially low, because fares are politically restricted to low levels or because the railways are subject to politically assisted competition from road transportation. 

Some progress has been made in "converting" publicly owned railway companies to private ownership but only by offering inducements, guarantees and/or financial subsidies to the new owners.  This is because the numbers simply do not stack up when it comes to return on investment.  In fact, as already mentioned, they rarely add up when it comes to just the cost of day-to-day operations compared with the money taken at the farebox.  So, can a railway make a profit? 



Arquivo 092 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/railway-finance.html

Railways Making A Profit?
You often hear people talking of railways making a profit.  What they are actually referring to, is that the railway takes in more fare revenue than it spends on operating costs.  People ignore the value of the infrastructure, they ignore interest payments, they ignore repayment of loans and they forget future renewals.  A railway company may choose to ignore renewals too, knowing that the government will be too afraid politically to let the system collapse for want of new trains or rebuilt track.  Government will therefore pay for them.  Even so, in spite of removing the renewal and financing costs of the railway, few railways are able to cover all their operating costs from farebox revenue. 
In looking at this list, there are two features of those systems which cover their costs or better, i.e. they provide a positive farebox ratio - one over 100%.  One is high patronage, the other is efficient management of the operation. High patronage is a feature of metro and suburban systems, which is why I have used them as an example. Most main line passenger railways will never perform to these financial standards. They just don't have the volume.

Efficiency
Efficient management is an important issue but don't forget the definition of the word "efficient".  Many people describe a railway as "efficient" if they see that the trains are clean and run to time.  Yes, the trains may be clean and they may run to time but it can cost an exorbitant amount of money to achieve this.  Japanese railways are offered as examples of "efficiency" but their cleanliness and reliability are not achieved without huge amounts of money being spent.  This is not efficient in the true sense of the word.  "Efficient" really means "cost effective use of resources" and this is why the private sector can be helpful in running or maintaining a railway system.  For some extraordinary reason, governments all over the world seem unable to control their management so that public services are run efficiently.  That's why the private sector can be useful in improving efficiency in running railway systems.  An example of this efficiency is in the UK, where one metro system under public management employs 40 persons per kilometre of route operated and another, more efficient, privately operated system uses only 16 persons per kilometre.

Another point is that the efficiency of an operation can be financially "loaded" to the point where the positive farebox ratio is only achieved by a reduction of staffing and maintenance which, in turn, leads to a deterioration in reliability.  This is seen in London, where the Underground system has achieved spectacular cost savings in recent years but its delay recovery performance has slipped sharply due to reductions in experienced staff, in training and in maintenance. The Public/Private Partnership (PPP) put in place for the system's infrastructure renewal and maintenance did improve conditions somewhat. So far, there have been some visible improvements but the service still suffers too many interruptions. Then the PPP system collapsed financially, having been set up on very shaky financial foundations.

In reality, the money available from the farebox on many railways is rarely enough to cover the cost of operations, particularly for older systems which require a lot of maintenance or for rural lines serving sparsely populated areas.  In these cases, some sort of financial support is inevitable.  The trick for governments is to make sure that this support is properly managed, which is why the UK has adopted a policy of offering franchises to railway operators on the basis of the lowest amount of support needed.




Arquivo 093 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/railway-finance.html

Maintenance
Maintenance costs have now gone commercial, along with the rest of railway financing.  Few published prices exist to give an idea as to how much maintenance can cost. Often the details of individual contracts are  deliberately obscure to preserve commercial confidentiality. Many cover an extended time and involve a degree of renewal as well as day-to-day maintenance.   Even railway companies which have tried to compare maintenance costs amongst their peers have not been able to get reliable like for like figures. There are doubts about the validity of those that are published.

Open Access
Open access means giving any suitably qualified railway operator the chance to provide a service over anyone's route.  There is a lot to be said for open access in theory - it removes the image of monopoly which railways have and it stimulates competition, which should drive down prices and drive up service, reliability and comfort standards.  Unfortunately, examples so far seen in Europe are not encouraging.  Some railway operators in the UK already provide two similar services between the same towns, sometimes using different routes.  There have been some successes but the confusion to the passengers has been in trying to determine the cheapest fare or most direct route.  Constant changes in tariffs and timings and endless restrictions have made it very difficult to get good information.

A further difficulty with open access is how to determine train timings.  Operators will usually determine when they wish to run a particular service and this timing will probably be dependent on connections with other trains.  The route owner then has to decide how to allocate paths.  In the UK, this has resulted in a series of complicated negotiations, shrouded in commercial strategies by the operators and with the rail route provider trying to show fairness as well as obtain the best commercial return for the paths they sell.  In some areas, the routes have reached capacity and the provider is being urged to invest in infrastructure improvements to produce more train paths.

In the UK, charges for train paths have come in for some criticism, the operators complaining that they are too high.  Well, they would, wouldn't they?  Whatever the truth of the matter, some operators seem to be making a commercial success of their service, while others are struggling to make ends meet.  In addition, some operators have performed very badly, train punctuality having declined since the privatisation regime was started a few years ago.

Financially, it is a precarious business. The collapse (28 January 2011) in the UK of the Wrexham & Shropshire Railway illustrates the problem very well. This is what they said when announcing their closure, "This very difficult decision has been taken following a full review of all possible alternatives, in which it was concluded that the business, which operates with no public subsidy, would not provide a return on investment."

New Project Financing
Obtaining commercial capital for expensive infrastructure projects requires that the organisation needing the money provides the investor with a reasonable rate of return on his investment.  If the pure commercial considerations show that this is not likely, there must be some sort of guarantee for the investor.  If money is borrowed, the guarantee must provide that the interest will be paid and that the amount borrowed will be repaid.  Guarantees for public infrastructure projects usually have to be provided by the government - the so-called "sovereign guarantee".

One way to get a project involved with private finance is to reduce the level of capital expenditure to be supplied by the commercial market. This will require the government to pay for part of the cost of the infrastructure. This can mean that the government will, say, pay for the cost of civil engineering work, while the private sector funds the purchase of trains, signalling, control, fare collection, power supply etc. - the electrical and mechanical parts of the system.  Put simply, it is treating the new railway project like a new road project.  The government builds the road but private industry supplies the trucks, buses and cars.  For a new rail route, how much the government will pay depends on the scope and type of railway being built. Let's see how this might work.



Arquivo 094 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/railway-finance.html


Metro Financing Example (Fictitious)
Let's assume we are trying to finance a metro line in a large, developing but fictitious capital city and we have prepared estimates for the number of passengers expected to use the system and the cost of building the system.  Suppose we have a line which is mostly elevated on concrete structures and runs for 15 kms across the city.  It might cost US$ 50 million a kilometre including trains and all equipment necessary to run the line - power, signalling control, communications, fare collection, a maintenance depot, stations and operating offices.  It could add up to US$ 750 million.  Let's assume we have borrowed the money to pay for it and we have got to pay interest at 10% per annum.  That's US$ 75 million a year in interest to pay - at least for the first few years. 

To cover the interest payments we need to sell tickets - lots of them.  Well, we have a large, populated city in a rapidly developing country and our consultants have done detailed traffic surveys.  They tell us we can expect an average of 150,000 passenger trips a day.  This is equivalent to a medium-sized metro or light rail system and would show a peak hour flow in the peak direction of about 18,000 - 20,000 passengers. 

Because this is public transit and we want to attract passengers and we want to keep them from polluting the city with their cars, we keep the fares as low as possible so we expect an average income of US$ 0.50 per trip.  This is actually low for the US and Europe but about right for a developing city.  It gives us an income of just over US$ 27 million a year.  Well, folks, this doesn't even cover our interest payments. And we haven't paid for our power yet, nor employees to run the system, nor allowed for maintenance costs, nor a sinking fund for renewals.  And we haven't figured out how to pay back the $750 million we borrowed in the first place, which the bank wants back in 10 years - equivalent to $75 million a year.
So, in our example, our costs are nearly seven times our income and our income estimates are already very optimistic.  Here, we are seeing income as 12.8% of expenditure.  In most modern rail transit projects the real income/expenditure ratio is between 5% and 20%.  Don't forget also that there won't be any income for the three to four years (or whatever) it takes to build the system.

High Speed Line Financing Example
In considering costs and revenue, we can look also at a high speed line.  In this example, the project is a 350 km line which is expected to cost US$ 17.5 billion to build and equip.  Daily trips are expected to be 250,000, so each trip must generate $19.75 just to cover interest payments.  An additional $75 a trip will be required to cover operating, energy and maintenance costs.  So far no profit has been included.  An airline ticket to cover the same distance is approximately the same price but the trip takes one third of the time.  The government would have to finance a large chunk of the construction costs (the expectation is 50%) and they would have to guarantee the repayments to lenders.  The hope is that property development in the areas around the stations along the route will generate finance and income to help fund the project.  Property can be very profitable but it is also a very high risk investment and it should be regarded as a long term investment.  Only a few new railways have generated much additional income through property development.

The Way Forward - Backwards?
The last 15 years have shown that the privatisation of the railways in the UK has not proved to be the success that politicians hoped it would be.  It has proved expensive, increasing real costs by 50% pro rata over those of the nationalised railway.  People will note a significant increase in traffic - 65% on the Midland Main Line for example - but it is more to do with years of economic stability, rising oil prices and severe road congestion than anything the railways have managed to do. Even during the recent years of recession, rail travel in the UK has continued to rise. This is largely, in my view, a function of road congestion, increasing fuel prices, security delays at airports, a higher student population and yield management techniques.

What is needed is the re-integration of the railway so that the wheel-rail interface is restored.  There are signs of this happening in the UK but it's been a long time coming. The nonsense of management by contract, which only increases work for lawyers and regulatory consultants should be stopped.  There is also still a huge backlog of training needed to bring the operational expertise back into the business.  Succession planning needs to be restored so that future generations can run a better railway than we have been allowed to do.  In the end, it's the people at ground level who keep the system going, in spite of their managers.  In general, they deserve better.





Arquivo 095 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/intermodal-freight.html

Intermodal transport
Intermodal transport deals with carrying freight using specially designed carrying and cargo protecting units that can easily be swapped between several transport modes, e.g. road, rail, inland waterways, open seas, air. This avoids unloading and reloading of individual items but results in a lower overall payload due to the duplicated load-bearing elements of the rail vehicle and the load carrying units. As a transport system, intermodal business tries to combine specific advantages of otherwise competing transport modes to achieve an overall gain for all partners involved.

In some countries, road vehicles used mainly for intermodal transport get a tax redemption and these may carry a heavier load, thus commercially compensating for the higher dead weight of the units carried. Intermodal terminals are the transfer points and must take into account the very different properties of the transport modes involved, e.g., road with single load-units carrying stochastic traffic flows, as compared to transport by trains based on timetabled transport of consolidated loads.

Terminology
In the intermodal business, many terms are used synonymously that have different meanings.

Multimodal is any transport that uses more than one transport mode
Intermodal are transports with load units swapped between transport modes
Combined transport has most of the route travelled by rail or by ship to reduce road usage, minimum distance covered by rail/ship 100 km, maximum distance covered on road 150 km at either end, as defined in the EEC paper 92/106.
The following description of intermodal business aspects is based on standardised, widely accepted rail-road technology, available throughout Europe. This segment is in the focus of European transport legislation, i.e. activities of the member countries are co-ordinated and special funding is available for research and operation expenses.

Load units
There is a great variety of unit types available, allowing a wide choice of cargo to be carried.

a) Standard lorries may be carried on "Rolling Highway" type low level wagons. The permissible undercarriage loading gauge is defined by ramp angles and wagon floor lids. Standard road vehicles may be carried by Channel Tunnel road vehicle carrying wagons without any size restriction.

b) Containers are carried on flat wagons, ISO deep sea containers unrestricted, other container types if coded to combined traffic rules. Street transport happens generally on artics.

Container types may have different properties, e.g., chemical bulk at 34 tons in 20 feet of length, differing internal and external width, height and length, as container types include flat rack, open top and fold away containers. All containers may be stacked several high, deep sea containers up to nine, other types three, with the handling usually done via corner fittings.

Deep Sea Containers may be stacked several high and, when loaded, generally leave the terminal area shortly after arrival. Empty containers are sometimes left for longer term storage.

c) Swap bodies are widely used in Continental Europe where they travel on truck-trailer combinations and are carried on railways generally on flat wagons and can be parked standing on retractable legs; they are basically similar to general road swap bodies wit grab pockets added to allow bottom lift.

This handling technology introduced by Freightliner in 1966 allows lightly constructed units without rigid top frame, thus they are not to be stacked. The bottom lift pockets allow several length versions and different makes of swap bodies, e.g., open top with tarpaulin cover.

Legged swap bodied can be parked standing on their feet, avoiding a second lift but needing time for lowering and raising the legs and making theft easier.

d) Standard height semi-trailers may be carried in pocket wagons or EuroSpine wagon units, dubbed piggyback. They are derived from road semi-trailers with added grab pockets and with a stronger frame and need additional ground personnel helping with the support props and guiding the king pin into the recess. The elements beneath the load carrying surface are prone to accident damage and theft.

e) The large number of intermodal units currently available does not allow fast changes to present technical details such as twist lock dimensions (top lift), grab pocket dimensions (bottom lift), bottom lock dimensions (road vehicle and rail vehicle connection via pins).

There are also differences in load unit usage between countries, e.g., swap bodies are widely used in Germany but in the UK flat semi-trailers are dominant in the road business.



Arquivo 096 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/intermodal-freight.html

Carrier wagons
The load mix greatly influences rolling stock choices, e.g., chemicals carried in tanks need more rigid wagon frames than swap bodies. Semi-trailers need their own special wagon equipment as well.

All wagons should be able to run at 100 kph, empty and loaded, as lower train speeds could incur higher track access charges. Central European railways’ procurement currently provides all wagons with empty and loaded speeds of 120 kph. Some specialised vehicles are available for 140 kph / 160 kph. Generally the higher air resistance reduces commercial viability, and singular high speed freight trains can not easily be run alongside general freight trains, during nights.

Trains would be allowed to reach lengths of up to 700 m, train masses up to 1600 tons.

a) Container carrier wagons are the mainly used vehicles, designed to carry standard containers and swap bodies with lengths varying between 20 ft and 45 ft, with weights generally ranging from 2.5 tons to 38 tons

Carrying capacities of the different types

two-axle wagon 40 ft 28.5 tons;
four-axle wagon 60 ft 70 tons (some 73 ft),
six-axle wagon 100 ft, 100 tons,
eight-axle 110 ft, 100 tons
b) Pocket wagons are the specialised vehicles to carry semi-trailers weighing between 7 tons and 38 tons. The road vehicle's weight is supported by its own wheels set down inside the pocket and by the king pin contact plate. The height of contact plate can vary between 980 und 1150 mm, so that a growing number of wagons can be adjusted in height accordingly.

c) Low level wagons

Available route clearance or load unit height would either allow standard UIC wagons to be used, or might result in the use of special low level wagons (some 30 cm can be gained with low level platform frames and small wheels and some 60 cm can be gained with loading wells between bogies). 1155 mm level of load bearing surfaces is standard, with special vehicles having down to 820 mm on platform wagons.

Lifting equipment
Not the last or least of the questions to be answered is the type and number of lifting equipment. The main choice is between reachstackers and gantry cranes.

a) Reachstackers can lift and carry all types of intermodal units and are quite flexible in their movements within the individual terminal as well as between terminals. They need an operational area of roughly 15 m width to move around between trains, lorries and storage positions. Wherever they need to move, it must be considered that the front axle carries up to 100 tonnes of static load on wheel surfaces of about one square metre.

Time needed to handle a single unit is quite short (1 to 1.5 minutes), but in the track area the reachstacker practically cannot serve more than one track and not more than two storage lanes, even though in dedicated storage areas third or fourth row stacking is achievable.

Reachstackers can easily cope with curved tracks. In the reachstacker’s favour, is that the terminal driver can be tasked to exchange paperwork with the customer driver, e.g., during off-peak service times, thus helping small-scale operations to become less marginal.

b) Rail running gantry cranes need less surface - basically two one metre wide lanes for the running gear - but the civil engineering requirements for the crane rail foundations are quite impressive, with static wheel loads of up to 30 tons. Crane track length (net) would vary 100-750 m, with some 30m extra for running gear length and emergency braking equipment.

The loading and unloading cycle is somewhat longer than with the reachstacker (1.5 to 2.5 minutes), but the number of lanes served is considerably greater, e.g., up to a total of nine tracks, road lanes and storage lanes between the running rails and two more lanes outside the crane rails, either on one or both sides, adding up to some 60 metres. Even wider movement coverage areas are in use for ship loading, with partly automated operation.

Operation of electric cranes minimises noise and pollution.



Arquivo 097 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/intermodal-freight.html

Transfer of used cranes to a different location is rarely possible because crane rails would generally differ in gauge.

Crane construction comes in two main types: truss girder and box frames. Box frames are easy to produce and their welding lines can easily be checked. Truss girder frames necessitate a high standard of proficiency in manufacture and examination, because of the many, circular elements connected at three-dimensionally oblique angles. Their main advantages are less girder weight and lower air resistance forces which in turn allow construction with less overall weight, leading again to savings in lower steel usage, lighter foundation construction, and lower operational costs, mainly concerning energy consumption.

Box frames can come in different shapes as well. A lozenge shaped main frame for example, with an underslung single running beam might reduce crane weight, when compared to the standard, right angle construction.

Generally, cranes have a rotating crab running on top of lateral main crane girders and are equipped with a spreader and bottom lift equipment supported from wire ropes, some of which are hung at an oblique angle to suppress horizontal movement of spreader and unit. The lateral sections of the main crane outboard of the running gear are described as cantilever arms. Lift height is usually at about 10.5 metres, allowing to lift one container over three others. Heights of up to 14m may be provided to allow higher stacking.

c) Rubber-tyred gantry cranes reduce the space requirements and improve parked load unit numbers compared with reachstackers and offer greater flexibility than gantry cranes. These cranes exist in an electrically driven form or with a diesel engine, the latter version allowing to serve segregated areas because wheels may be steered. The running gear always limits the lateral movement of lifting gear and load units.

This is a crane type that can be used to serve a small-throughput terminal with just a pair of short tracks; with added demand, tracks can be lengthened or another track element can be added. This crane type is generally operated from a hand-held control panel, i.e., without an operator’s cab.

d) The spreader is the load grab unit allowing the lifting of containers of different lengths using the twist locks on top while bottom lift prongs can be used for swap-bodies and intermodal semi-trailers.

The operator cannot see the load grip elements and appreciate their proper functioning, so that electric sensors check safe status and visualise the status via coloured lights.

The need not to damage the trailer or swapbody and the necessity to grip the load safely unit requires a lot of hydraulic equipment and a decent number of joints.

e) Terminal tractor are specialised tractors for the transport of semi-trailers within terminal confines, to allow the use of additional parking areas not served by gantry cranes.

Alternative systems
a) The Rolling Highway (Rollende Autobahn - Rollende Landstrasse) business is a completely different matter. This rail transport type is currently only employed over a very restricted number of routes, most of them crossing environmentally sensitive areas.

This restriction of usage is mainly due to the rather low percentage of allowable payload and the very specialised nature of the rail equipment with very delicate small diameter wheels.

b) The Eurotunnel service for public road vehicles is another similar service allowing any standard sized road vehicle to be carried by rail, to avoid combustion engine pollution in the environmentally sensitive area of the Channel Tunnel.

c) Various makes of road vehicles are available which can pick-up a container from the rail wagon and carry the unit along public roads at standard speed and set down the unit at the customer’s premises. This technology works without any preparation necessary on the rail side of the business: a short track section alongside a road vehicle carrying surface suffices. The drawback of this top-lift solution is the heavy weight of crane machinery carried around with the lorry.

d) Then there are lorries available which can move the container horizontally between wagon and road vehicle, but can not set down the unit at road level. This bottom-lift system requires non-standard mobile units.

e) Some wagon prototypes are available (and some types already withdrawn) that allow standard semi-trailers to be put onto wagons without the need to lift the road vehicle. The particular technical facilities of the wagons need special operators besides the lorry driver, so the running costs counteract the lower construction costs.

f) Finally the very special systems include many older approaches to intermodal business, some outdated and some newly invented, which are outside the scope of space available here. Some of these systems allow:

carrying rail vehicles of different rail gauges,
carrying rail vehicles on public streets,
containers to be picked up from street level using a hydraulic "back hook" system.



Arquivo 098 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/fare-collection.html

There are only two ways to collect fares from passengers - before they get onto the train or once they are on the train.  If must be remembered that if there is a way for fares not to be paid, they will not be paid.  The method often adopted is to collect fares on trains but this may not be effective for high capacity trains with short distances between stations.  In this case the simplest and most effective method is to collect fares before trains are boarded. This is best effected by automatic fare collection (AFC).

Automatic Fare Collection (AFC)
In an attempt to cut down on the ever increasing fraud by passengers and staff, more and more high capacity railways are installing automatic fare collection, commonly known as AFC or, in some places ARC, automatic revenue collection.  AFC has two advantages: It automates the ticket accounting and selling processes and it can give detailed data on system usage.  It also reduces ticketless travel, although it never completely eliminates it, and it allows more revenue to be collected without employing an army of staff.

AFC Elements
The elements of AFC are:

Ticket vending machines (TVMs), where passengers can buy a ticket for their journey
Ticket office machines (TOMs), used by railway staff to issue tickets at stations
Add value machines (AVMs), where passengers having a stored value ticket can increase the residual value.
Faregates, which form a barrier between the "unpaid" area of the station and the "paid" area where passengers must possess a valid ticket.  The faregate will read and release the gate when a valid ticket is presented.
Tickets, which come in a number of varieties (according to the system in use) but which all have an electronically encoded data content indicating the validity and/or use of the ticket.
Website marketing and selling.
Smart card, credit/debit card and smart phone ticketing.
A computerised accounting and management system, which consists of a station computer for each station and a central computer linked to all the stations.
The AFC elements are all linked electronically, so that each transaction is recorded and can be accounted for against sales income.

Ticket Selling
Tickets are sold from manned ticket offices or TVMs strategically positioned around the entrances to the station.  The location of TVMs is important so that they are easily seen, easy to access and are not located in places where queues will obstruct the free flow of passengers or where safety is jeopardised.  TVMs should not be placed close to escalators, stairs or doorways but they should be within sight of the ticket office staff so that problems can be dealt with quickly and easily.

One of the objectives of AFC is to reduce the amount of manual transactions to a minimum.  For a high capacity railway, where thousands of passengers may pass through one station in an hour, keeping queues to a minimum is essential, both for commercial and safety reasons.  People don't like to be kept waiting to buy a ticket and large numbers of standing passengers will quickly cause an obstruction in the circulating areas of a station.  The location and size of the ticket offices in a station are therefore critical.  They must be designed in conjunction with the number and location of the TVMs to be provided.

It is good practice to locate a ticket office at the gate line where passengers pass through the faregates from the "unpaid" area to the "paid" area of the station.  This allows the ticket clerk to view problems with gates and to operate gate release control when necessary.  It will also be a safety requirement that gates can be released quickly for evaluation purposes.  If the ticket office is correctly located, passengers with ticket problems can approach the office from either side and the office can be more efficiently manned.  Where possible, ticket selling should be restricted to one office to keep staffing requirements to an efficient level.  Larger, heavily used stations will require more than one office but this may need to be manned only on a part time basis.



Arquivo 099 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/fare-collection.html

Ticket Types
There are two main types of ticket used in AFC systems -  the single journey ticket and the stored value ticket.  Smart cards, recently introduced for some mass transit systems, are an electronic form of stored value ticket.  The single journey ticket is essential for the occasional traveller or visitor to the system.  The ticket is good for one journey.  Normally, the ticket is inserted into the entering faregate and the gate released if valid.  The same ticket is used to exit the destination station but it will be retained by the exit gate.

It is becoming the practice on many systems, to restrict the sales of single journey tickets to TVMs.  If passengers ask for a single journey ticket at the ticket office, they will be directed to use the TVM.  Change may or may not be offered according to the policy of the operator.  In Bangkok, the new metro system has to employ extra staff to give change for TVMs at busy times.

Faregates
The purpose of an AFC system is to ensure that every passenger has a valid ticket when he enters the railway and that he pays the correct fare for the journey he has made.  The most effective way of doing this is to impose a barrier of faregates across the station entrance which will only allow passengers with valid tickets to enter the system and board a train.

One example (photo left) of how design has evolved is in the new slim line faregates designed for the Jubilee Line extension in London.  The gate flaps are designed to prevent passengers from climbing over them or crawling under them.

In Hong Kong (photo left), older faregates introduced with the opening of the first part of the system in 1979 were of the tripod variety.  They have been modified to take the "Octopus" smart card as well as the original, plastic single journey tickets.  The smart card does not need to pass through the reader.  It can be read electronically as long as the card is within 100 mm of the reader.

Variations
Many European railways have semi-automated fare collection systems, where tickets are purchased in advance of the trip and then "validated" (usually time stamped) at a machine at the entrance to the "paid area".  There are no faregates and no physical restrictions on entry.  Policing the system is by roving ticket inspectors who are able to impose on the spot penalty fares for passengers without valid tickets. 

A penalty fare system is used in the UK on suburban lines around London in an attempt to reduce fraudulent travel.  It is detested by honest passengers who get caught up in the system, usually because of undermanned or closed ticket offices and inoperative TVMs.  In an attempt to further reduce fraud, faregates are being installed in many inner London stations.

In some cities, tokens are used in place of tickets.  Barriers or gates released by the insertion of a token are used to allow access.  The token is retained by the machine upon entry.  One-way release gates are used to allow egress.  It is difficult to police and there is often fraudulent use of exit gates.  Tokens work where a flat fare is in place and were perhaps most famous in New York City where the token survived for over 45 years until recently, when it was replaced by a stored value card AFC system.

Smart Cards
New fare collection systems are now using smart cards.  This is simply a debit card which operates a reader at each faregate approached.  The reader will open the gate and record the start point of the journey and then record the exit point and deduct the required fare.

Smart cards were first introduced in Hong Kong in 1997 with the name "Octopus" and have since spread to London (Oyster) and other major metro systems.  Washington DC WMARTA system started their SmarTrip system on Metro stations in May 1999 and extended it to buses with a 9-month trial which started in late 2001.  Buses were completed in August 2004.  Car parking was converted to smart card operation in June 2004.  Perhaps one downside to the system is the ability to add value by a cash payment on the bus.  This will delay the loading while passengers add value to their cards.

Octopus Cards, the smart-card issuer controlled by MTR Corp, has about 11.1 million cards in circulation, with an average of 8.7 million transactions per day, valued at HK$60 million.  More than 10 per cent of its sales volume is by retail purchase.  London has adopted a similar system called "Oyster”.

Debit card and smart phone use is now being introduced on more and more transport systems. These work in much the same way as smart cards but the user doesn’t require a special card issued by the transport operator. 




Arquivo 100 - http://www.railway-technical.com/operations/fare-collection.html
