página 001 - https://www.american-rails.com/history.html
Arquivo - 001
Railroad history in the United States is nearly as old as the country itself, dating back to the mid-1820s. As we know, this great nation would not have grown and prospered as it did without the railroads, which brought together the young country and allowed for unprecedented prosperity.
The "Golden Age" lasted from roughly the 1880s until the 1920s, at which time other modes (automobiles and airplanes) slowly eroded the railroads' transportation monopoly. 
In addition, stifling government regulation beginning in the early 20th century eventually choked them to the point of desperation.  
Unable to set their own freight rates, abandon unprofitable routes, or rid themselves of money-losing passenger trains many were on the brink of collapse by the 1970s; names like the Penn Central, Rock Island, Milwaukee Road, Reading, Jersey Central, and others.  
Following deregulation in 1980 the industry made a comeback and today is witnessing a renaissance. In this section we will look at the history of our country's involvement with trains from its earliest beginnings in the 1820s through today.
A Brief History. Railroads in America can be traced back to 1815 when Colonel John Stevens gained the first charter in North America to build the New Jersey Railroad Company, although it was not constructed until 1832.  
The NJRR later went on to become part of the Pennsylvania Railroad's far-reaching network. Colonel Stevens also tested the first type of steam locomotive in 1826, when he showcased his "Steam Waggon" (basically a steam-powered horse carriage) on a small circular track he had built at his estate in Hoboken, New Jersey.
Arquivo - 002
Later, in August of 1829 Horatio Allen, a chief engineer for the Delaware & Hudson Canal Company (which went on to become the Delaware & Hudson Railway) tested an early English steam locomotive on a 16-mile stretch of company-owned track between Honesdale and Carbondale, Pennsylvania. 
The locomotive was named the Stourbridge Lion, a very simple two-axle machine with a vertical boiler.  It, along with three other similar designs, was envisioned to handle coal from the D&H mines at Carbondale to Honesdale.  
Alas, only the Lion was ever tested and ultimately proved too heavy for the track, spending most of its time stored away in a shed. 
A year later, in August of 1830, the three year old Baltimore & Ohio carried out trials of the Tom Thumb, the work of Peter Cooper.  A month after this event the South Carolina Canal & Railroad Company (SCC&RR) tested its Best Friend of Charleston.
The SCC&RR would also be remembered as the first to haul a revenue train with an American-built design when its Best Friend of Charleston, a product of the West Point Foundry in New York, carried paying customers on December 25, 1830.
While the steam locomotive had proven its worth on the South Carolina road the B&O is recognized as our nation's first common carrier (a corporate entity which is expected to haul anything, within reason, offered to it by the general public).  
The railroad was chartered on April 24, 1827 to solidify Baltimore's standing as one of America's important ports and provide competition against New York's Erie Canal.  
Shortly after B&O's creation merchants in Charleston, South Carolina chartered the aforementioned South Carolina Canal & Railroad Company intended to link Charleston with Hamburg (along the Savannah River).  
As the success of these operations, and others, grew railroad mania struck the nation.  The new form of transportation could operate in all types of weather and move people and goods at previously unheard of speeds. 
By 1840, states east of the Mississippi River boasted over 2,800 miles of track and a decade later that number had more than tripled to over 9,000. During these early years much of the trackage was still disconnected and largely concentrated in the Northeast.  
There were also a variety of different gauges in service, ranging from 4 feet 8 1/2 inches (which later became standard) to six feet.  
Unfortunately, traveling could be a tricky, proposition as railroads saw no need to develop safe operations.  Even after development of modern "T"-rail, old strap-iron rail was still used for many years.  
This led to cases of deadly "snake heads" where iron straps came loose from their attached wooden planks and tore into the under-frame of cars, injuring or killing passengers.  In addition, cars themselves were not reinforced to better withstand the carnage during derailments.  
Arquivo - 003
Railroads used their power to influence politicians and avoid infrastructure improvement and safety enhancements, such as knuckle-couplers and air brakes.  Such things only cost money.  
In their greed they even refused to interchange freight with one another.  This arrogant attitude eventually led to extreme regulatory oversight.  
Who invented the railroad?  As mentioned elsewhere in this article, the first chartered railroad in the United States was the New Jersey Railroad Company of 1815 while the Granite Railway was the first actually put into service in 1826. 
However, railroading's roots can be traced back centuries before the modern incarnation was born during the 19th century.  As with many of our contemporary transportation technologies, the railroad came about gradually over time. 
Many different individuals are recognized for developing a number of different devices which found their way into what would now be described as the modern-day railroad of the 1820's. 
According to historian Mike Del Vecchio's book, "Railroads Across America," the very first railroad-like operation was opened in England during 1630 which used wooden rails, with wooden cross-ties (or "sleepers") for lateral support, to haul coal.
The first known implementation of iron rails occurred at Whitehaven, Cumberland in 1740, followed by William Jessop's (Loughborough, Leicestershire) invention of the flanged wheel in 1789.  The steam engine is attributed to Thomas Newcomen who received a patent for his design in 1705. 
It was later improved upon by James Watt in 1769 who realized expanding steam was much more powerful and efficient than Newcomen's condensing version.  He first employed the engine in steamboats, which later made their way to the United States. 
Before Colonel John Stevens tested his "Steam Waggon" in 1826, the first patent for a steam locomotive is credited to Englishmen Richard Trevithick and Andrew Vivian in 1802. 
It entered service in 1804 along the Merthyr-Tydfil Railway in South Whales where it pulled loads of iron ore along a tramway.  Two decades would pass before the first modern version appeared, the work of George Stephenson. 
Although often overlooked, the very first device which could be described as a "locomotive" was the work of a Frenchman, Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot, in 1769.  It was steam-powered but did not run along a fixed trackway. 
Today, this historic piece of engineering still survives, housed and on display at the Musée des Arts et Métiers in Paris.  All modern locomotives and automobiles can trace their heritage back to this machine. 
Once more, Britain earns the recognition as putting the first contemporary railroad into operation when the Stockton & Darlington Railway formally opened on September 27, 1825. 
Arquivo - 004
Mr. George Stephenson, a well-known builder of early steam locomotives, was also heavily involved in this project: he surveyed the route, gauged the rails to 4 feet, 8 inches (only a 1/2-inch narrower from the width which would later be recognized worldwide as standard-gauge); and, of course, furnished the locomotives. 
His little 0-4-0, named Active (later renamed Locomotion No. 1) was placed into service that day, earning Stephenson recognition as creator of the modern railroad.  His designs would also find their way onto early U.S. railroads until American builders became well-established. 
For their many advantages, some in public simply did not like the iron horse.  As John Stover points out in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," one school board in Ohio described them as a "device of the devil" while those overseeing the Massachusetts turnpike called them "cruel turnpike killers" and "despisers of horseflesh."  
There was even a claim that rail travel would cause a "concussion of the brain."  Despite corporate malfeasance and the public's weariness, the efficiency and speed trains offered could simply not be argued.  
During the Civil War railroads once more proved their worth as they quickly transported men and material to the front lines at speeds not previously possible.  
The North effectively harnessed this advantage, as historian John P. Hankey points out in his article, "The Railroad War: How The Iron Road Changed The American Civil War," from the March, 2011 issue of Trains Magazine.  
Its ability to do so was predominantly why it won the war.  Before hostilities had ended efforts were already underway to link the entire continent by rail.  
With the creation of the Pacific Railway Act, signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln on July 1, 1862, authorizing construction of the Transcontinental Railroad.  
The new legislation formed the Union Pacific Railroad to build west from the Missouri River at Omaha, Nebraska while the Central Pacific struck out eastward from Sacramento, California.  Both companies were given large tracts of land to complete their respective sections. 
After several years of hard work, particularly for the Central Pacific, the two met at Promontory Point, Utah during a formal ceremony held on May 10, 1869.  
Without the Pacific Railway Act our country's history would likely be very different as rail travel opened the west to new economic opportunities.  
After the Transcontinental Railroad's completion the industry exploded; by the 1890s there were more than 163,000 miles in operation.  
Eventually, four major railroads established direct lines from the Midwest to West Coast including the Great Northern, Northern Pacific, Santa Fe, and Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific (Milwaukee Road) while others worked together in linking both points.  
The era also saw many other advances as the late historian Jim Boyd notes in his book, "The American Freight Train."  After several years of distrust a standard track gauge of 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches was adopted during the 1880s along with development of the automatic coupler and air brake.  
Arquivo - 005
All three initiatives proved revolutionary, allowing for greater efficiency and much safer operations.  From the late 19th century though the 1920's railroads enjoyed their greatest dominance and profitability; in particular was the year 1916, which saw mileage peak at over 254,000 and railroads carried virtually 100% of all interstate traffic. 
During the 1930s the streamliner era hit the nation, all in an attempt to sway patrons back to the rails.  These fast, sleek new machines provided a new perk; color and modernity never before seen.  
The industry's transportation dominance ended after World War II, as a long decline followed thereafter.  In response, the so-called mega-merger movement was launched in the 1950s in an attempt to cut costs through consolidation.
At the time the move was only partially successful as railroads slipped into despair by the 1970's.
The common observer could see this for themselves as tracks became weed-choked while trains were dilapidated.  For carriers like the Rock Island and Penn Central, both on the verge of complete shutdown, dirty and barely operational equipment was not uncommon.  
What happened in the 1970's has many causes although it can arguably be traced back to expanded powers placed upon the Interstate Commerce Commission following the passage of the Elkins Act (1903) and, in particular, the Hepburn Act (1906) and Mann-Elkins Act (1910).  
The latter two legislative actions gave ICC the authority to set freight rates and force railroads to explain why any rate change should be implemented.  
It was a lengthy, time-consuming process that was rarely successful.  The expanded federal oversight was all brought about to limit railroads' power as many executives had grown arrogant and forgetful of their ultimate purpose, to serve the public interest.  
Unfortunately, the legislation went too far and had placed an increasing burden on the industry by the post-World War II period, at which point they no longer held a transportation monopoly.  
During the 1970s several famous companies went under, now termed fondly as "fallen flags."  The decade also saw the collapse of Northeastern rail service following Penn Central's 1970 bankruptcy.  
Its failure led to others as neighboring railroads filed for reorganization. What eventually came out of the mess was the Consolidated Rail Corporation.  
A federally-funded corporation to restore service, Conrail began on April 1, 1976.  A few years earlier, also partially in response to PC's downfall, another government-sponsored railroad was born, the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak).  It launched on May 1, 1971 and relieved many of their money-losing passenger services.
In his book, "Rock Island Requiem," author Gregory Schneider highlights how bad the issue became during the Penn Central bankruptcy hearings.  Until deregulation the industry was not a true free market, everything (including any potential line abandonment) was controlled through the ICC.  
Arquivo - 006
Before Penn Central was folded into Conrail, Federal Railroad Administrator John Ingram highlighted the difficulty for any railroad to abandon an unprofitable branch.  While touring the former Pennsylvania Railroad's Delmarva Peninsula trackage he said this during a speech highlighting the PC's plight:
"Let me tell you a little story about the abandonment of unprofitable branch lines.  One weekend last summer I was headed for Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, to enjoy the Atlantic Ocean.  
You have to drive across the Eastern Shore of Maryland to get there, and I asked my staff to list a few of those Eastern Shore branch lines that the Penn Central wants to abandon. 
I wanted to see for myself - perhaps count the boxcars on sidings to see if there really was a shortage of business.  I drove to the area, checked my maps, and simply couldn't find anything that looked like a railroad.  
On Monday morning, I hollered at my staff for having sent me off on a wild goose chase, but they stuck to their guns.  So we went back - this time with property maps and a surveyor.  
We found the branch line, all right.  At one place it was directly under a junkyard full of wrecked cars.  At another point the highway department had covered the tracks with at least eight inches of pavement.  
And just off the road we found a six-inch wide tree growing between the rails.  That line had been completely forgotten, yet grown men were arguing before the ICC that that stretch of track was vital to the Nation's economy!"
Railroads of today would likely be very different if it wasn't for the Staggers Rail Act of 1980, proposed by Harley Staggers of West Virginia.  Prior to this legislation there had been discussions of simply nationalizing the entire industry, a scary proposition that both executives and those in the government wished to avoid.  
The bill brought a great level of deregulation as railroads regained their footing thanks to renewed freedom in setting freight rates and abandoning unprofitable rail lines.
The 1980s saw a slow recovery as Conrail posted its first profits in late 1981 and the mega-merger movement continued, creating today's Norfolk Southern Railway and CSX Transportation that decade. I
n the 1990's the trend continued as the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway and Burlington Northern merged to form the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway in 1995.  
Also, Union Pacific purchased the Chicago & North Western while Norfolk Southern and CSX gobbled up Conrail in 1999.  The freight growth has continued into the 21st century.  We have also seen a renaissance in rail travel as folks look to escape the highway gridlock.



Página 2 - https://www.american-rails.com/beginning.html

Arquivo - 007
As T.J. Stiles points out in his authoritative title, "The First Tycoon: The Epic Life Of Cornelius Vanderbilt," the railroad fundamentally changed the United States in far more ways than simply improved transportation. 
It ushered in the modern, corporate America we know today where huge conglomerates preside over nearly every facet of our lives.  The railroad was the first business of its kind to employ thousands, serve millions, and capitalized in the hundreds of millions. 
They directly impacted numerous, intercity municipalities although, ironically, were privately owned ventures. As the 19th century dawned no one could have imagined such incredible machines would soon exist to whisk freight and passengers at previously unheard-of speeds.  But as with all technologies the railroad was slow to develop.  
After the steam-powered Stockton & Darlington Railway debuted in England during 1825 the first rudimentary, non-steam powered systems appeared in the United States the following year. 
However, more than a decade would pass before railroading truly took hold in America.  By 1840 railroads were here to stay although many technological developments remained before efficient, safe operations became commonplace.
A New Era In Transportation, Railroads In The 1820'
As Mr. Stiles' book notes, early U.S. railroads were not conceived to provide interstate, or even intrastate, travel.  Instead, they were constructed entirely for specific needs.  Take, for instance, America's first, the Granite Railway of Massachusetts. 
It opened on October 7, 1826 carrying a wide gauge of 5 feet.  The line was only 3 miles in length and entirely horse or mule-powered.  Its entire purpose was to transport granite slabs between Quincy and the Neponset River (Milton) for construction of the Bunker Hill Monument project. 
In an era long predating the modern, all-steel "T" rail, the Granite Railway utilized massive stone rails.  This was unique and rare even for that time period when many engineers were employing the cheaper, and lighter, strap-iron technique.  During the late 1820's several projects were underway up and down the eastern seaboard. 
One of the first was the Mohawk & Hudson Railroad, incorporated on April 17, 1826 to connect the Hudson River at Albany with the Mohawk River at Schenectady.  It was designed as a shortcut to compete against the heralded Erie Canal for transporting people and goods between Schenectady and Albany (state capital). 
Due to funding issues it took more than four years until construction began and was not completed until August 9, 1831.
On that day a little 0-4-0, named DeWitt Clinton, pulled the first load of paying customers, earning it recognition as the first steam locomotive to operate in New York. 
The long delay in M&H's completion meant other operations were credited with various "firsts."  Most notable was the Baltimore & Ohio. 
Arquivo - 008
The B&O was created largely out of a great need by the city of Baltimore to compete with the Erie Canal, which connected New York City with the Port of Albany at Buffalo.  In addition, Philadelphia was organizing a plan to build a similar transportation system across the state linking Pittsburgh.  
Fearing its city would be left at an economic disadvantage Baltimore leaders formed the B&O, originally chartered on February 28, 1827.  In January, 1830 the B&O launched service over its first 1.5 miles from a small station in Baltimore at Pratt Street.  That same summer (August 28th) the railroad successfully tested Peter Cooper's 2-2-0 "Tom Thumb." 
It lost its famous race with a horse that day but nevertheless proved the steam locomotive's viability.  Cooper's contraption is also credited as the first American-built design ever placed into use although, as a test-bed unit, was never actually operated in regular service.
Another important railroading pioneer was the Delaware & Hudson Canal Company.  According to Jim Shaughnessy's book, "Delaware & Hudson: Bridge Line To New England And Canada," it was conceived by brothers Maurice and William Wurts to transport clean-burning anthracite coal from mines near Carbondale, Pennsylvania to New York City for home and commercial heating purposes. 
Their original plans called for a duel, canal/gravity railroad.  The latter was designed by John B. Jervis and the company ordered four steam locomotives from England to handle the necessary tonnage.  Only one would ever be used, the Stourbridge Lion, manufactured by Foster, Rastrick & Company of Stourbridge, England. 
Jervis tested the little 0-4-0 on August 8, 1829 but sadly it proved too heavy for the track.  Despite this setback the little locomotive earned distinction as the first standard design ever operated in the United States. 
The next significant development occurred on the South Carolina Canal & Rail Road Company, a system based in Charleston, South Carolina.
The SCC&RR was the longest railroad of its day when it opened 136 miles between Charleston and Hamburg (near Augusta, Georgia) during October, 1833.  The project's purpose was, once again, to serve a specific need. 
In this case, the port of Charleston wanted to haul agricultural products from inland farms, notably cotton, to the city for shipment. It was formed on December 19, 1827 and began construction thereafter. 
Aside from its length and importance the SCC&RR also carries the honor as the first to operate an American-built steam locomotive in revenue service when the Best Friend Of Charleston (built by the West Point Foundry of Cold Spring, New York) carried a trainload of paying customers on December 25, 1830. 
Another noteworthy railroad was New Jersey's Camden & Amboy, formed on February 4, 1830 as the Camden & Amboy Rail Road Transportation Company. 
A project of Robert Stevens it was envisioned to link the Delaware River at Philadelphia with the Raritan River, which ran into New York City.  Many railroads of this era were built specifically to complement either preexisting canals or highly trafficked waterways. 
This was the case for the C&A which began construction in December, 1830 at Bordentown, New Jersey.  The first 13 miles to Hightstown opened to the public on October 1, 1832.  Its first steam locomotive, the 0-4-0 John Bull (built by the Robert Stephenson & Company of England) entered service in 1833. 
Arquivo - 009
The locomotive is significant due not only to its early design but also modifications which later became standard on future models; C&A personnel added a lead bogie (truck) to decrease derailments (giving it a 2-4-0 wheel arrangement), a pilot (cow-catcher) to move animals off the right-of-way, a covered cab for the crew's protection against the weather, headlight, bell, and even a covered tender. 
By then it had become part of the much larger United Canal & Railroad Companies.   (The C&A would later join the growing Pennsylvania Railroad [PRR[ in 1871.)  Also of note was Philadelphia's Main Line, a combination canal and rail artery built during the 1830s to connect western Pennsylvania with the Ohio River.
Unfortunately it was much too cumbersome; the canal operation was eventually scrapped and the rail corridor turned over to the PRR.  The early railroads dealt with much more than just engineering and logistical issues.
Not everyone was sold on the newfangled technology and canal owners lobbied heavily to suppress or outright deny their construction. 
The public had justifiable safety concerns although in some cases the dangers were completely exaggerated.  As John Stover points out in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," some of the more ridiculous assertions claimed they were a "device of the devil" and could cause a "concussion of the brain."
While England could proclaim itself as railroading's birthplace, by 1840 its total mileage (1,500) had been far surpassed by the United States.  Interestingly, the financial Panic of 1837 did not seriously inhibit railroad construction, unlike later on when these economic recessions seriously stunted additional mileage. 
As previously discussed, the B&O was a pioneer in nearly every facet.  Its value in advancing new techniques, which later became standard practice, can also not be understated. 
As by Kirk Reynolds and David Oroszi note in their book, "Baltimore & Ohio Railroad," nearly everything decision it made was an educated guess based on what little was known about railroads and engineering practices at the time.  
Perhaps most challenging was constructing a proper right-of-way and figuring out the curvature limits and gradient a typical train could handle.  
To aid in this endeavor its engineers sailed to England for ideas concerning these topics.  Among their most notable takeaways was track gauge; English lines were utilizing a width of 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches which was ultimately adopted by the B&O.  
Its next task was in designing a track guideway for the trains' wheels to follow.  Once again, engineers found themselves in unknown territory as they experimented with various techniques from stone guideways with wooden beams to iron straps using the same principle.  
They eventually learned the best, most economical design was a wooden beam reinforced with a iron strap supported by wooden crossties.  
Iron strap rails did work although proved incredibly dangerous as worn straps could let go causing the deadly phenomenon of "snake heads," which easily ripped through the floors of early wooden cars and maimed or killed passengers. 
Finally, engineers had to conceive a right-of-way capable of handling this new form of technology.  Once more, with no books or prior research to guide them, Lieutenant Colonel Stephen H. Long of the U.S. Army who was overseeing survey work, and Johnathan Knight, a civil engineer simply made educated guesses. 
The B&O would initially use horses to power their trains with the intentions of one day switching to steam propulsion.  As a result, Knight and Long used very conservative figures, limiting the ruling grade to a very respectable 0.6% (or a mere 6 inches of elevation for every 100 feet traveled). 
Arquivo - 010
Interestingly, they allowed curves to be relatively sharp at 14-18 degrees, unaware the length trains would one day reach.  Future practice would allow for stiffer grades with less severe curves.
Gaining a true understanding of early railroad car development can be difficult due to anecdotal stories or just outright misinformation.  It is further complicated by the lack of historical documents available. 
If you are interested in this subject three books on the topic are a must, all written by John H. White, Jr.: "The American Railroad Passenger Car" (Parts I and II) and "The American Railroad Freight Car."  As he notes, the story of America's first passenger cars built from stagecoaches remains widely told to this day. 
In reality, while these were influenced from stagecoaches and manufactured by stagecoach builders, they were actually designed from the chassis up. 
The first known passenger car contract was awarded to Richard Imlay of Baltimore in 1828 when the Baltimore & Ohio approached him about supplying the company with equipment. 
The first, based from the standard mail coach of the day, was named the Pioneer and placed into service during May, 1830.  It was followed by five more nearly identical designs that same August. 
Information on freight cars from this period is even more scarce since the public paid little attention to such things and there were no agencies in place to monitor railroads.  
The previously mentioned Granite Railway employed a basic, reinforced wooden flatcar designed by Gridley Bryant which utilized horse power to transport the marble over huge stone rails.  Again, during an era without reliable references ideas and concepts were abundant. 
"The first series of cars were carried by four wagon wheels.  The stones were carried below the axles on a platform raised or lowered by a hand-powered winch fastened to a wooden truss frame that stood above the wheels."  For such an early period these cars were well crafted, finely built contraptions. 
Bryant's concept proved so successful that it remained unchanged until the original Granite Railway system was abandoned in 1866. 
In 1830, and throughout that decade, most freight was transported in either a flatcar, a simple gondola (A simple flatcar with short sides to hold ladding [freight], it is more commonly known as the gondola. 
The first is credited to the Baltimore & Ohio of 1832 which referred to it as a "flour car" since it handled barrels of flour.), or an early type of hopper known as a "jimmie."  The latter predominantly handled anthracite coal, such as the small, 1,600-pound cars found on the Lehigh Coal & Navigation Company at Mauch Chunk, Pennsylvania. 
These small cars could handle about 3,000 pounds each and transported anthracite coal from open-pit mines near Mauch Chunk over a 9-mile, 42-inch gauge railroad to the Lehigh River where the product was carried on to eastern points such as Philadelphia. 
As the 1840's dawned, railroads were becoming a unified network but much work remained at established a system capable of efficient, interstate service.




Página 3 - https://www.american-rails.com/1840s.html

Arquivo - 011
As 1840 dawned in the United States, railroads remained largely novelty.  Watercraft were still the most efficient means of transportation, aided in part by numerous canals (notably the Erie Canal and Pennsylvania's Main Line of Public Works) either in full operation or under construction at that time. 
However, having already proved their advantage in speed and year-round operation, railroads were here to stay.   As John Stover points out in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," in 1840 the U.S. contained just under 3,000 miles of track.  This number would more than triple by 1850 (9,000+).   
Much of it was concentrated in the Northeast/New England although some disconnected lines had opened in the Southeast and as far west as Illinois. 
One of the decade's most significant developments was the Pennsylvania Railroad's chartering in 1846, formed by the state legislature to maintain Philadelphia's leverage as a major port city.  
By 1850 railroads had blossomed into a unified matrix with lines linking the east coast and Midwest.
The industry's growth led to a significant (and important) auxiliary network of car builders, locomotive manufacturers, and related businesses.  In this section we will look briefly at how railroads continued to expand during the 1840s.
While the late 1820's and 1830's are widely understood as the founding era of American railroads, the 1840's were also an experimental decade. 
During that period engineers and early experts were still under a huge learning curve trying to establish a guide of "best practices" including such things as a standard gauge, efficient coupling system, and car designs. 
A few of the more notable advancements occurred in infrastructure.  While many early railroads still employed the strap iron rail method (thin sheets of iron fastened to wooden stringers) it was fast being replaced by the solid "T" rail. 
In his book, "Railroads Across America: A Celebration Of 150 Years Of Railroading," author and historian Mike Del Vecchio describes the following regarding this revolutionary invention:
"Legend has it that T-rail was invented by Robert Stevens (the son of Colonel John Stevens).  Robert was whittling while traveling to England to purchase rails for the Camden & Amboy, and [stumbled onto] the I- or T-shaped form. 
The first boatload of T-rails, 550 pieces, each sixteen feet long, three inches tall and weighing thirty-six pounds per yard, arrived in Philadelphia in May, 1831." 
Many of the country's first railroads, like the Baltimore & Ohio, used stone ties.  The massive blocks were very labor extensive to both transport and install. 
Arquivo - 012
By contrast, their wooden counterparts were much lighter while still providing sufficient lateral strength.  Finally, ballast (crushed stone) found increasingly widespread use during the 1840s. 
Engineers found that it not only reinforced the track but also acted as an excellent drainage system which kept water away from the rails. 
With an improving infrastructure and increasing demand, cars and locomotives also needed upgraded.  The latter witnessed major advancements through the 1840s and 1850s as America veered away from English designs. 
The earliest predecessor of the modern American Locomotive Company was established in Schenectady, New York in 1848 (Schenectady Locomotive Works) while Matthias W. Baldwin, a former jewelry maker, built his first steam locomotive in 1831.  
In his book, "Baldwin Locomotives," Brian Solomon notes it was a small design commissioned by Franklin Peale as a display piece for the Philadelphia Museum. 
Baldwin based his locomotive on those used in England's famous Rainhill Trials held in October, 1829.
He continued refining his work and even helped assemble British locomotives shipped to America.  In 1832 he manufactured his very first, full-scale locomotive for the Philadelphia, Germantown & Norristown Railroad.  It carried a 2-2-0 wheel arrangement and was named Old Ironsides. 
Closely based on Robert Stephenson's early 2-2-0 Planet design, it was placed into service on November 23rd that year. 
As previously mentioned, early American railroads imported almost everything from England (rails, locomotives, cars, etc.) since that country had a well-established manufacturing center and its products were less expensive.  This had changed, however, as America's network became better established. 
In his authoritative book, "The American Railroad Freight Car," author John H. White, Jr. notes that by 1840 most U.S. railroads had further broken from British influence and abandoned the open freight car concept. 
Instead, most were closed (aside from flatcars) in an effort to protect ladding (freight) against weather and, in some cases, vandals.
It was becoming clear America would surpass its longtime rival in overall tonnage and mileage.  To meet growing demand, American railroads shifted to two-axle trucks by 1840. 
As Mr. White notes, they offered more than just increased capacity for freight cars; since many railroads had been built cheaply with, in many cases, sharp grades, stiff curves, light rail, and little or no ballast the extra axles offered greater weight distribution. 
Arquivo - 013
Perhaps, though, its greatest attribute was its pivoting, free-swiveling design which enabled a car to easily navigate all types of track conditions. 
The first four-axle car was placed into service on the Baltimore & Ohio during the winter of 1830/1831 to ship cords of firewood from outlying forests into Baltimore as home heating fuel. 
These experimental cars worked exceedingly well and the B&O eventually rostered some 25 of what were dubbed "Trussell Cars" by 1834. 
Shortly thereafter the railroad contracted with J. Rupp and H. Schultz for 110, 24-foot boxcars featuring two-axle trucks. 
By 1838 the B&O stated it was upgrading all freight cars with two-axle trucks.  The concept quickly caught on throughout the industry and by 1850 few two-axle freight cars remained in service.
Passenger cars remained as rudimentary as their freight hauling counterparts. 
In many ways, they had seen even fewer advancements during the ten years following the B&O's inauguration of passenger service (Mount Clare to Carrollton Viaduct) on January 7, 1830. 
The first railroads relied on cars inspired by stagecoaches, which provided few accommodations and an even rougher ride. 
The modern diner, lounge, sleeper, and other popular services which became commonplace by the late 19th century were still decades away.  However, advancements in the standard coach were being made. 
Soon after the B&O placed its first Trussell Car into service, the company sought an overhaul of its stagecoach-influenced passenger cars.
In his book, "The American Railroad Passenger Car," author John H. White, Jr. points out that as early as 1828 or 1829 the B&O was visited by Joseph Smith from Philadelphia with a proposal for a rectangular coach of significant length to handle more travelers. 
While never actually built it was a radical departure from typical designs. 
The idea was later picked up by B&O's treasurer, George Brown, who requested an testbed car based on Smith's idea which would feature double trucks.  It was named the Columbus and constructed during the spring of 1831. 
Officially placed into service on July 4, 1831 it was initially pulled by horses although steam locomotives had soon taken over these duties by July 13th. 
Arquivo - 014
In another first, the B&O also placed the first modern coach into service during 1834.  In his excellent book, "The Railroad Passenger Car," author August Mencken notes it was the work of Ross Winans, featuring a center aisle running longitudinally with seating to each side that carried double-trucks.  
While only a prototype all future passenger cars were based from this design (incredibly, one such "Winans Car" remained in regular use on the Tioga Railroad until 1883).  As the 1850's dawned, strides were being made in seating capacity but also passenger comfort. 
The latter was revolutionized by George Pullman during that decade who recognized a market in pampering travelers.
During the 1840s railroads could still be described as rudimentary with little government jurisdiction.  As a result, accidents, injuries, and deaths were common. 
The lack of federal authority meant railroads could do whatever they pleased and most refused to work together in the name of competition and greed. 
Despite these problems, railroads were the fastest way to travel and by 1850 every state east of the Mississippi, except Florida, could boast at least a few miles of track.   
In addition, the now widely recognized 4-4-0 wheel arrangement was developed at this time, credited to Henry R. Campbell in 1839. The so-called "American" type became the most commonly used and best recognized locomotive of the 19th century thanks to its combination of power, speed, and reliability.  
The Camden & Amboy's John Bull, a pioneering locomotive built by Robert Stephenson & Company and entered service in 1831, was later upgraded by C&A engineers with a lead "bogey" truck. 
This feature allowed the locomotive to easily negotiate curves and became a common feature for those wheel arrangements used in main line service. 
This included the 4-4-0, which was refined into the late 1800s and early 20th century with arrangements like the 2-8-0, 2-6-0, 2-8-2, 4-6-0, and many others.  By the 1840s, the seeds of which became the four major eastern trunk lines (Pennsylvania Railroad, New York Central, Baltimore & Ohio, and Erie) were well established. 
What transpired in the 1840s led to an even greater explosion of new construction the following decade. Aside from the tripling of mileage further technological improvements allowed trains to reach the Midwest in a mere two days instead of a month at the 19th century's dawning. 
The 1850s would witness railroads breaking across the Mississippi River into Texas while plans were being drawn up for a transcontinental route into California. 
The book "Railroads In The Days Of Steam" by Albert L. McCready and Lawrence W. Sagle, notes that in 1835 more than 200 railroads were either proposed or under construction with around 1,000 miles in operation.  By 1850, 9,022 miles of railroad were in service which constituted an investment of $372 million.


Página 4 - https://www.american-rails.com/1850s.html

Arquivo - 015
The 1850s were a defining decade in American railroading as scattered systems became an organized and fluid interstate system. 
What began in the 1820s as local ventures, serving a specific purpose, had transformed into an indispensable transportation network by 1850. At that time there were a total of 9,022 miles in active service. 
This number had more than tripled by 1860 to 30,000+ and would continue to rapidly increase over the following two decades (despite severe financial panics in 1857 and 1873). 
The decade also witnessed technological advancements in communication, traveling accommodations, more powerful locomotives, heavier freight cars, and overall speeds. 
The latter had improved to the point one could reach Chicago from New York in just two days.  At the turn of the 19th century such a trip had taken more than a month! 
The 1850s also saw railroads reach across the Mississippi River, serve parts of Texas, and lay down roots in California. By this point in America railroads had blossomed into the driving force behind America's Industrial Revolution.
As the iron horse reached increasingly critical needs, the federal government made plans to complete a transcontinental route to the Golden State. 
The book "Railroads In The Days Of Steam" by Albert L. McCready and Lawrence W. Sagle, notes that investors had spent some $372 million on railroads in 1850. 
In his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," John Stover points out this number had skyrocketed to $1.15 billion by 1860.  Almost single-handedly railroads transformed the United States into a world power.
The 1850s not only established railroads as the preeminent mode of travel but also witnessed a flurry of additional new construction.   
While future decades witnessed greater mileage (notably the 1880's) the 1850s demonstrated the iron horse's remarkable abilities to transport considerable freight and passengers and previously unheard of speeds. 
Perhaps Mr. Stover stated it best: "By the mid-fifties the United States, with no more than 5 percent of the world's population, had nearly as much rail mileage as the rest of the world...Few other institutions in the country did business on so vast a scale or financed themselves in such a variety of ways." 
This sentiment is confirmed in the book, "The First Tycoon: The Epic Life Of Cornelius Vanderbilt," by T.J. Stiles as he articulates how railroads were the first large corporations, employing thousands and capitalized in millions. 
Arquivo - 016
Another major achievement reached at this time was the first use of telegraph in 1851 to control train movements. 
This new system allowed railroads near instant communication, in coded dots and dashes, and spurred the construction of line-side poles, which became a common sight along nearly every rail line through the 1980's (by then used primarily for signaling purposes). 
Finally, most of the now widely-regarded tycoons were involved with railroads by the 1850s; names, like Vanderbilt, Collis P. Huntington, and Jay Gould.  These individuals, and others, oversaw most of the new construction which took place through the latter 19th century.
Even the government was becoming involved as the iron horse became a vital means of transportation.  By the mid-1850's, the United Stats controlled virtually all of central North America from the Atlantic to Pacific coastline. 
Because of this, leaders in Washington recognized a fast and efficient means of transportation was needed.  This was furthered by California achieving statehood on September 9, 1850. 
While the "Gold Rush" brought tens of thousands of prospectors across its borders, it was rich farmland within the San Joaquin Valley, and seaside ports (totaling 840 miles), that transformed California into the country's most successful economy.   
The state's involvement with the iron horse predated the Transcontinental Railroad by more than a decade. 
The Sacramento Valley Railroad is identified as its first, filing articles of incorporation as a common-carrier on August 4, 1852.
California's very first railroad actually put into operation was the Arcata & Mad River Railroad, established in 1854 and opened later that year.  It was built by private interests to load lumber schooners in Humboldt Bay near Arcata.
According to the book, "The Northern Pacific, Main Street Of The Northwest: A Pictorial History" by author and historian Charles R. Wood in the spring of 1853 Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (who later became president of the Confederate States of America) initiated the task of surveying western routes to the Pacific Coast.
There were eight options put forth running along various, north-to-south parallels.  Due to the ongoing issue of slavery Congress could not agree on which. 
As a result the entire undertaking remained dormant for years. As tensions between northern and southern states grew it reached a crescendo when Abraham Lincoln was elected president on November 6, 1860. 
Only weeks later, South Carolina formally seceded from the Union (December 20, 1860); soon afterwards several other states followed, Confederate forces opened fire on federal troops stationed inside Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor on April 12, 1861, and the Civil War officially began. 
Arquivo - 017
With the nation's fracturing, northern leaders settled on the central option although its construction did not begin until 1862 and was not finished until May 10, 1869. 
In spite of this, the 1850s did witness one successful endeavor of the federal government; the granting of large tracts of lands to railroads in an effort to build and develop new areas west of the Mississippi, the Great Plains which became home to many of the classic granger lines like the Rock Island, Milwaukee Road, Burlington, Chicago Great Western, and others.
Two of the 1850's most significant corporate developments was the original New York Central Railroad's formation on May 17, 1853 and the Erie Rairoad's completion in the spring of 185.
The former opened a through route from Albany to Buffalo and later became part of Vanderbilt's New York Central & Hudson River Railroad connecting New York with Chicago. 
The latter opened its original main line between Piermont and Buffalo, New York in 1853.  The Erie was the jewel of New York and the only railroad at that time to boast a route of its length under common ownership. 
In later years the company finished a through corridor from New York to Chicago, acting as the smallest as the four major eastern trunk lines. 
The other two noteworthy systems, the Baltimore & Ohio and Pennsylvania Railroads continued their push westward past the Ohio River.  As this was ongoing, Chicago was fast becoming the "central hub" of the industry, then-served by 11 railroads.
Around the Mississippi River the Illinois Central completed its so-called 705-mile "Charter Lines" on September 27, 1856. 
This corridor formed a rough "Y"; the main line would head north from Cairo, Illinois, pass through Clinton, and reach Freeport before turning west and terminating at Dunleith (East Dubuque) along the Mississippi River.  It would span a total of 453 miles.  
Arquivo - 018
In addition, a so-called branch would track due north from a point which later became Centralia (incorporated in 1859 it is named for the point where IC's Charter Lines converge) and reach Chicago, totaling 252 miles
Also, in 1859 George Pullman completed his first sleeping car.  The company he later founded would blossom into the most successful and well-known passenger car manufacturer of all-time. 
The book, "The Cars Of Pullman" by authors Joe Welsh, Bill Howes, and Kevin Holland note that it was named "Old #9" and was rebuilt from a former day coach.  The car was 40 feet in length, featuring 10 upper and 10 lower berths containing mattresses and sheets but no sheets. 
It also boasted a small toilet, wash basin, wood-stove for heating purposes, and candles for lighting.  While rudimentary by later standards it was quite revolutionary for the time.  Railroads in the 1850s also saw a major shift in traffic flow.
Before trains became a reliable means of transportation the fastest way to move people and goods was via the water.  For this traffic to move from the East to Midwest required the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers which flowed in a predominantly southern direction, eventually reaching New Orleans and the Gulf of Mexico.
With railroads building directly westward into Ohio, Indiana and Illinois traffic could flow directly east-west with Chicago fast become the terminating western hub because of its location along Lake Michigan. 
The city also was the ideal northern terminating point for railroads built north-south such as the Illinois Central and after the western railroads opened they chose Chicago as their eastern terminating hub since so many railroads already served the city and interchanged people and goods there.   
Railroads in the 1850s and the expansion that took place during the decade set the stage for what would transpire during the Civil War and how the campaign transpired.
The North would hold a commanding advantage in the war not only because most of the country's industrial base was centered in the Northeast but also because most of the railroads with most of the trackage centered in the Northeast and Midwest (it also didn't help that since much of the war was fought in the South significant infrastructure was damaged or destroyed).
Aside from the war other factors that were becoming issues in the 1860s included many different track gauges which were affecting traffic interchange and the number of bridges crossing major waterways.



Página 5 - https://www.american-rails.com/civil.html

Arquivo - 019
Railroads in the Civil War would play a pivotal role in deciding how the campaign transpired. The North not only held a commanding advantage in total mileage but also boasted a mighty industrial machine across New England.  
There were many reasons for the South's failure to achieve victory.  One of the most noteworthy was its inability to properly utilize the railroad. 
It also faced an unforeseen problem of suffering tremendous damage from Union forces which were successful in regularly disrupting operations.  
Since most of the fighting occurred below the Mason-Dixon Line this issue was only magnified as the conflict wore on. For its part, the North suffered setbacks as well.  Most notably was the venerable Baltimore & Ohio which lay in the heart of the fighting.  
Initially, the B&O was an ardent Southern sympathizer but that changed after a series of Confederate attacks severely crippled its network.
As Mike Schafer notes in his book, "Classic American Railroads," it proved an invaluable asset for the Union.  
Aside from the war railroads dealt with other issues throughout the 1860's, such as numerous track gauges and a lack of sufficient bridges spanning major waterways.  Issues like these resulted in a lack of fluidity.
When discussing railroads during the Civil War their role is often overlooked.  They proved a vital asset in the movement of troops and materiel, ultimately allowing the North to achieve total victory.  After fighting broke out in 1861 the country had a rail network totaling more than 30,000 miles. 
Of this, 21,300 miles (along with 45,000 miles of telegraph wire), or about 70%, was concentrated in the Northeast and Midwest while the Confederacy enjoyed only 9,022 miles (and 5,000 miles of telegraph wire).
Despite this discrepancy the South did command one advantage; most of its trackage was brand new at the time. 
As William Thomas points out in his book, "The Iron Way: Railroads, The Civil War, And The Making Of Modern America," 75% of its lines had been constructed only in the 1850s.  
The railroad may have still been a relatively new technology during the mid-19th century but the need for heavier rail, reinforced bridges, and durable rights-of-way to handle ever-increasing tonnage had become well understood by that time.
The Confederacy's lack of such infrastructure was further compounded by its inability to effectively harness the iron horse for military purposes as historian John P. Hankey articulately points out in his excellent essay from the March, 2011 issue of Trains Magazine entitled, "The Railroad War: How The Iron Road Changed The American Civil War."  
Arquivo - 020
For instance, Southern leaders believed civilian rail movements should take precedence over military transports.
It was not until the war's final years did the Confederacy understand the railroad's usefulness. In contrast, by 1862 the North began laying the groundwork for what became a unified and efficient transportation network.  
It began with President Abraham Lincoln's signing of the Pacific Railway Act into law on July 1, 1862, authorizing construction of the Transcontinental Railroad.
The project was launched within a year and formally completed on May 10, 1869 when Union Pacific and Central Pacific met at Promontory Summit, Utah.  
The idea for such a coast-to-coast railroad dated back to 1854-1855 when then-Secretary of War Jefferson Davis led surveying efforts west of the Mississippi River. 
Mr. Thomas goes on to note that leaders in the North viewed railroads a bit differently than their Southern counterparts.   While both understood their importance, the South saw trains as a means of maintaining slavery's status quo for economic growth. 
By comparison, the North employed them as a means of developing new territories for trade and economic prosperity, which led to the Transcontinental Railroad's creation.  There were four potential routes chosen; a northern, central, and two southern corridors.
Unfortunately, none could satisfy parities both for, and against, slavery and the plan was shelved. However, once the war broke out, states seceded, and Davis became President of the Confederate State of America, the Union was free to do as it wished.  
Northern leaders subsequently settled on the central route which was projected to run due west of the Missouri River at Omaha, Nebraska/Council Bluffs, Iowa and terminate at San Francisco.
While Union Pacific's and Central Pacific's project is best remembered it was not the only transcontinental project undertaken at that time.  
On July 2, 1864 President Lincoln signed an updated Pacific Railroad Act into law which created the Northern Pacific Railroad Company to build a northern route into the Pacific Northwest.  
The NP was dealt a series of logistical and financial problems that delayed its completion by nearly two decades.  
However, once finished it too was instrumental in opening another segment of the country to economic growth.  In time, three other systems reached Puget Sound; Union Pacific, Great Northern, and the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific (Milwaukee Road).
Arquivo - 021
The original Pacific Railway Act was not the only important event of 1862; that year also witnessed creation of the United States Military Railroad.
The USMR did not take direct command of the North's rail network (Unlike a half-century later when the United State Railroad Administration operated the nation's railroads during World War I from 1917 to 1920.).  
Instead, it acted as its own enterprise and made use of trackage when needed to offer the best tactical advantage. The North fully understood the railroad's importance and mobility.  As Mr. Hankey notes virtually all major conflicts were located either at or near important rail junctions.
The USMR was under the command of General Daniel C. McCallum (former general manager of the Erie Railway) and General Herman Haupt (former chief engineer of the Pennsylvania Railroad).  
These expert railroaders were incredibly effective at putting together a skilled workforce to maintain efficient operation. The two men were also adept at preventing field officers from interrupting everyday affairs through either meddling or special requests.
The maps featured here are historic items produced during or just after the war and housed at the Library of Congress.
The first was the work of James T. Lloyd in 1861 depicting all railroads in operation at that time; the second was authored by Julius Bien in 1866 and highlights those rail lines requisitioned by the United States Military Railroad throughout the war.  Note that General McCallum's name is prominently displayed on this map.
As previously mentioned, for the significant damage Southern railroads received the B&O was also hit hard since its main line was situated right along Union and Confederate lines within the border states of Maryland and Virginia (West Virginia after 1863).  
John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," the B&O rescinded its Southern support when Confederate militia, under the command of then-Colonel Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson, laid siege to its line through Northern Virginia.   He believed that by crippling B&O's network the Union could not effectively wage war.  
While this tactic was unsuccessful the Confederacy did cause more than $2.5 million in damages (over $35 million in today's dollars) which required 10 months to repair. In an attempt to curb further property destruction the railroad built the first-ever armored rail car. 
It looked quite similar to the South's famous Merrimack ironclad warship except that it rode on wheels!  
Interestingly it was the very B&O that initially proved the railroad's tactical effectiveness; on June 2, 1861, more than a month prior to the war's first major engagement at the "First Battle of Bull Run" (known within the Confederacy as the "Battle of First Manassas") it transported troops from Grafton, Virginia to a location about six miles east of the city to capture the town of Philippi ("Battle of Philippi").  
The speed of the movement caught Southern forces off-guard, demonstrating just what the railroad could do.
Arquivo - 022
For the Union's many successes the South enjoy its own triumphs with this technology.  There was the previously mentioned "Battle of First Manassas" when General Joe Johnston used the Manassas Gap Railroad to move his troops into position, eventually securing a Confederate victory.  
Also, the "Battle of Chickamauga" in early September of 1863 saw a Southern victory after General James Longstreet quickly moved his force of 12,000 men from Virginia to Georgia, which bolstered Confederate lines as part of the Army of Tennessee.  Thanks in large part to this effort U.S. forces were defeated after three days of fighting.  
More often than not it, however, it was military strategy and not the railroad which led to Southern victory.  With a belief in unilateral states' rights there was no central oversight or management of its network.  By the time leaders realized this fallacy all hopes for total victory had, to a greater extent, been lost.
Perhaps the most famous railroading event of the war took place in the South, best remembered as the Great Locomotive Chase.  It all began in April of 1862 when disguised Union soldiers stole the General, a Western & Atlantic 4-4-0 "American Type" steamer in an attempt to destroy Confederate supply lines.
Also known as the "Andrews Raid" it began at Marietta, Georgia and lasted for nearly 91 miles until a Confederate crew caught up with the locomotive near Ringgold. During the chase the Southerners used a hand-powered track car as well as the locomotives Yonah, Shorter and Texas before finally catching the raiders.
The twenty-two Union soldiers attempted to flee after abandoning the General but were soon discovered. For their bravery the U.S. troops were awarded the Congressional Medal Of Honor, some posthumously.
During the war's final years Southern railroads were in such horrid condition they offered virtually no strategic military importance.  
In particular was the Louisville & Nashville which saw the most destruction of any system.  The Confederacy's idea to win the war had largely been predicated on outlasting its aggressor.  
A similar tactic was successful just over a century later when North Vietnam caused enough American casualties during the Vietnam War to cause the U.S. government to give up.  
The Confederacy faced a much more determined leader in President Lincoln who, for a number of reasons, did everything within his power to reunite the country and was eventually successful in that effort.  
Looking back, the South may have achieved its desired result if Lincoln had never found an effective commander.  
As Mr. Hankey points out, had the U.S. lost one battle here or there it may have turned the tide.  Today, this is all conjecture, of course, but the questions and rhetoric regarding such are still brought up among historians.
Number of USMR locomotives os 419
Total USMR rolling stock is 6330.
2105 is Mileage operated by the USMR.
10000 is Average cost in the north for a new 4-4-0
Arquivo - 023
There were six railroads serving Richmond but not one interchanged with the other.
60 punds is Average rail weight (per yard) during the Civil War. Today, rail is roughly twice as heavy.
220000 is The amount of rail produced annually by the North at the start of the war.
26000 is The amount of rail produced annually by the South at the start of the war.
0 is The amount of rail and number of locomotives produced in the South after the war began.
4000 is Rail mileage laid annually in the North during the conflict.
400 is Rail mileage laid annually in the South during the conflict.
15 is a Average cost of new cast-iron wheels in the South in 1861 
500 is a is a Average cost of new cast-iron wheels in the South in 1865.
While the Civil War had emotionally and physically scarred the country, the railroad paved the way for further expansion and growth after hostilities ended.
Between 1850 and 1871 the federal government offered more than 170 million acres of western land to railroads in exchange for establishing new routes between the Midwest and the west coast.
Along with the aforementioned Transcontinental Railroad the Northern Pacific, financed by banker Jay Cooke, began a northerly route from Lake Superior at Duluth, Minnesota to Seattle, Washington in 1864.
Building through the very rugged and remote regions of western Montana, northern Idaho and Washington it took NP nearly twenty years before its completion in 1883 (hampered, partially, by the financial Panic of 1873).
Finally, two major technological advances were introduced just a few years after the war; George Westinghouse's automatic air brake of 1869 and Eli Janney's automatic coupler of 1873.  
These two devices were so revolutionary they remain in regular use today as the most practical and efficient way to stop a train and join/detach equipment.  
As the century came to a close railroads were rapidly opening new routes, branches, and corridors throughout the country.
Even though track widths were still prolific and a standard gauge had not yet been established the 1860's did witness improved cooperation, particularly in railroads' willingness to exchange freight. 




Página 6 - https://www.american-rails.com/chase.html

Arquivo - 024
The Great Locomotive Chase has become a legendary event that unfolded during the early years of the Civil War, an attempt by Union forces and sympathizers to destroy railroad infrastructure north of Atlanta, Georgia in hopes of eventually capturing the strategic city of Chattanooga, Tennessee.
The celebrity locomotive in what also became known as Andrews' Raid was the Western & Atlantic Railroad's General. The American Type 4-4-0 steamer was commandeered by James Andrews himself (leader of the raid) and used throughout the chase where he traveled northward from Atlanta causing as much damage as he could.
Unfortunately, the hasty Union plans were too slow and disorganized to cause serious damage and most of those involved were eventually captured. Today, for history's sake the General remains preserved in Kennesaw, Georgia at the Southern Museum of Civil War & Locomotive History.   
While the Great Locomotive Chase may have ended in Union loyalists failing to complete their goal it was a great example of the determination and bravery exhibited by both sides in fighting for their cause (and ultimately ended in most being recognized for their efforts).
What is also regarded as Andrews' Raid occurred during the early years of the Civil War and was carried out on the morning of April 12, 1862. Leading the daring attempt was a civilian scout and spy known as James J. Andrews, who as an engineer and two other members of his party were also able-bodied railroaders; William James Knight and Wilson W. Brown (both of whom were privates in the 21st Ohio Volunteer Infantry).
Andrews' plan hoped to accomplish two goals, aside from destroying as much Confederate property as possible on his journey north from Atlanta he hoped to aid Major General Ormsby M. Mitchel who was moving his army through Tennessee and eventually hoped to capture the strategically important city of Chattanooga. 
To pull off the raid Andrews was able to recruit roughly two-dozen soldiers from the 21st and 33rd Ohio Infantries as well as one other civilian, William Hunter Campbell.
The plan was to grab a northbound express passenger train out of Atlanta at the fuel and rest stop of Big Shanty (now known as Kennesaw), so chosen because the location did not have a telegraph, which would allow the raiders more time in executing their mission.
On that fateful morning, the team boarded the Western & Atlantic train at Marietta, Georgia and informed Conductor William Allen Fuller that they were Confederate secret service agents on a special mission for General Beauregard. While somewhat wary of the story, especially of Confederate deserters, Fuller allowed the men to board the train without much of an issue. 
Once the train had stopped at Big Shanty and the passengers and crew were enjoying breakfast at the next-door Lacy Hotel Andrews' team sprang into action (aside from the hotel the only signs of life at this location along with the depot was Confederate Camp McDonald).
The train was led by the General, a 4-4-0 American type locomotive built by the Rogers Locomotive Works of Patterson, New Jersey in 1855. Additionally, the consist included two passenger cars and three empty boxcars.
It is somewhat shocking that Andrews' team was even able to steal the train as sentries were posted not far away. Nevertheless, William Pittenger and some of the other men uncoupled the passenger cars then hopped in the boxcars while Andrews, Knight, Brown, and another individual (who would work as the fireman) jumped in the cab of the General and off they went. 
From the hotel Fuller could see that his train was being stolen and immediately raced after it on foot along with engineer Jeff Cain and W&A Locomotive Superintendent Anthony Murphy (in this era locomotives usually did not travel faster than 15 to 20 mph at-speed).
Arquivo - 025
As the General gained speed the pursuers realized that catching it on the run would not possible so they grabbed a nearby handcar (a manually powered track car) and continued on. Not far up the line Andrews stopped quickly at Allatoona to cut telegraph wires and pull up a few rails.
Unfortunately, due to their pursuers and lack of manpower the raiders did not have enough time to cause any serious property damage (such as burning bridges, razing other buildings, or tearing up large sections of track). 
For instance, not far up the line at Etowah sat the locomotive Yonah as well as a bridge. Andrews wanted to destroy both but lack of time forced him to steam on, and only received waves from the soldiers and passengers waiting at the small depot who were unaware of what was happening.
During the Civil War the railroad industry was still considered in its infancy although even by that time operations had become increasingly sophisticated including having strict timetables, which had to be closely adhered to avoid collisions (this was before the era of modern track circuits and signals).
Andrews had acquired a timetable for the Western & Atlantic line and thus knew when to expect a train although this still meant he had to pull his train into sidings to meet oncoming traffic such as at the W&A yard in Kingston. Here, Andrews met the southbound train from Rome, Georgia and its crew began inquiring as to the whereabouts of Conductor Fuller and the rest of the train. 
Again, Andrews quick thinking got him out of trouble as he explained the train was rushing northward to resupply Beauregard with ammunition, a story that was very believable since it was an express run anyway with few station stops.
Unfortunately, Andrews could not have predicted the tenaciousness of Fuller who had acquired his own locomotive, the Yonah, and was now in hot pursuit of his train. The raiders were also running into another predicament; as they waited in Kingston for another southbound freight to pass they learned that there several extras behind it (denoted by a red flag at the end of each train).
As Andrews learned through a conductor on one of the trains, Confederate forces had learned that General Mitchel planned to march towards Chattanooga and Beauregard was moving as much equipment out of the city as possible. 
This long delay nearly allowed Fuller and the Yonah to catch the raiders, as he learned at Kingston he was just minutes behind them. Unfortunately, the yard was full of traffic and Fuller and his crew abandoned their locomotive there, instead opting to catch the next northbound run out of the yard.
At Adairsville they saw more signs of damage left behind by the raiders but the engineer of the locomotive Texas, Peter Bracken, handed his steamer off to Fuller's team who were in such a hurry that they did not even bother to turn it around.
Time was running out for Andrews and his raiders; by the time they reached Calhoun the whistle of the Texas could be heard in the distance. At Dalton, Fuller's on-board telegrapher was able to get a message through to Chattanooga about the incident just before the raiders cut the line. 
With forces now approaching from both north and south Andrews' team was desperate; they tried to burn the bridge at Chickamauga with an oil-soaked boxcar but it would not catch. Finally, at milepost 116.3 (just 18 miles south of Chattanooga) with the General out of fuel and water the team abandoned the locomotive and took off through the Georgia countryside on foot, every man for himself.
Most of the group, including Andrews, was later captured although some managed to escape back to Union lines. The fate of those who were captured was mixed; some escaped, others were exchanged for Confederate POWs, and a few including Andrews were hung as spies.
A handful of the Union soldiers were awarded the Medal Of Honor, many posthumously, although Andrews was not eligible as a civilian. Additionally, the Governor of Alabama commended many on the Southern side for their bravery, including Conductor Fuller. Today, the General is a permanent reminder of all those involved in the legendary Great Locomotive Chase.



Página 7 - https://www.american-rails.com/trnscntl.html

Arquivo - 026
Who built the Transcontinental Railroad?  It has been argued as the greatest single achievement ever accomplished within this great republic that we call the United States. 
Perhaps even more impressive is the time required to do so; with virtually no mechanization whatsoever, crews from the Central Pacific and Union Pacific hacked out rights-of-way through empty wilderness in only six years! 
Altogether, the entire project brought forth nearly 2,000 miles of new railroad.  It was spearheaded by Abraham Lincoln although its roots trace back to the 1850's. 
Our 16th President lobbied hard to see it finished, understanding its importance in protecting and uniting the country against the Confederacy.  In the end, of course, its greatest legacy was settling the West.  
Author and historian Mike Del Vecchio notes out in his book, "Railroads Across America," no other event in American railroading was quite as important. 
With its completion, cross-country travel was reduced from months to mere days (although direct rail service was not possible until a bridge opened across the Missouri River between Omaha and Council Bluffs in 1872). 
Today, the famous meeting at Promontory Summit, Utah, which officially signaled the Transcontinental Railroad's completion, no longer serves as an active rail line.  However, the location, known as the Golden Spike National Historic Site, is maintained by the National Park Service and open to visitors.
There have been several excellent books published over the years that thoroughly cover the Transcontinental Railroad subject.  As a result, this article could, in no way, come close to those works. 
However, it is my hope that the information presented here provides a brief synopsis on the topic.  You may be surprised to learn that its genesis predates the Civil War's outbreak by nearly a decade. 
According to the book, "The Northern Pacific, Main Street Of The Northwest: A Pictorial History" by author and historian Charles R. Wood in the spring of 1853 Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (who later became president of the Confederate States of America) initiated the task of surveying western routes to the Pacific Coast.
There were eight different options put forth running along various parallels from north to south.  Due to the ongoing issue of slavery, however, Congress could not come to a consensus on which. 
As a result the entire undertaking went dormant. Tensions between northern and southern states reached a crescendo when Abraham Lincoln was elected president on November 6, 1860. 
Only weeks later, South Carolina formally seceded from the Union (December 20, 1860); soon afterwards several others followed, Confederate forces opened fire on federal troops stationed inside Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor on April 12, 1861, and the Civil War was upon the nation.
Arquivo - 027
With the country in turmoil the North now had the freedom to choose whichever route it wished and settled on the central option. 
As note, President Lincoln was a true believer in the Transcontinental Railroad, not only for its potential economic benefits but also its nationalistic importance. 
Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809 and first entered politics at a very young age when, at just 23, he tried to gain a seat within the Illinois state legislature. 
He had been fascinated by railroads since their introduction back east, believing they were the future in transportation. 
In his authoritative book, "The Men Who Built The Transcontinental Railroad, 1863-1869: Nothing Like It In The World," author Stephen Ambrose notes that Lincoln stated during a campaign speech, "no other improvement...can equal in utility the rail road." 
As a lawyer he defended the Illinois Central against the state in a case involving tax exemption.  Then, on an even more important issue he won a landmark decision in 1857 regarding the railroads' right to bridge navigable waterways. 
In that case, he successfully represented the Mississippi & Missouri Rail Road (predecessor to the better remembered Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad or "Rock Island"). 
It was the first to cross the mighty Mississippi River in 1856 but within a year a steamboat had collided with one of the bridge's piers.  The steamboat company sued for the structure's removal but Lincoln successfully argued otherwise.
In 1853, Congress first directed Secretary Davis to survey three routes to the Pacific coast; the northerly line would run along the 49th parallel near the Canadian border, the central would depart from the small community of Omaha, Nebraska Territory (Nebraska achieved statehood on March 1, 1867) at the 42nd parallel, and finally the southerly corridor would follow the 32nd parallel.
Naturally, Southern loyalists, including Davis, argued for the latter and were so stubborn they refused to have any part in the enterprise if it built above the Mason-Dixon Line. 
The standstill remained unchanged until Lincoln's election, which saw Southern senators and congressmen walk out.  This left their Northern counterparts the easy decision of choosing the central option. 
It was Greenville Dodge, an excellent engineer and decorated U.S. Army officer of the Civil War, who fervently believed, and ultimately swayed Congress, to back the Omaha routing. 
From this community along the Missouri River it would follow the Platte River nearly all the way to the northeastern Colorado border. 
At the town of North Platte, where the North Platte River and South Platte River split, the railroad would diverge slightly into Colorado, turn north along Lodgepole Creek into Wyoming Territory, slip past the Laramie Mountains, cross the Medicine Bow Mountains, and then head for the Green River. 
Arquivo - 028
Once in Utah the line would aim for Salt Lake City, then the only noteworthy western settlement.  Beyond this point, Union Pacific's planners were rather uncertain since another endeavor, building east from Sacramento, California, was projected to meet them somewhere near the Sierra Nevada Mountains.
The Transcontinental Railroad's western leg was known as the Central Pacific, the vision of Theodore D. Judah.  While there were many who put great time, energy, and money into the venture his unyielding efforts in what he called "his" railroad (Central Pacific) laid the groundwork.
He firmly believed an acceptable route with manageable grades could be built through California's seemingly impenetrable Sierras. 
In 1859 he began lobbying for it and on January 14, 1860 even opened what was the dubbed the "Pacific Railroad Museum" inside the Capitol building.  Unfortunately, as with everything in Washington, both then and now, Congress was slow to act. 
There were many doubters and Judah was severely handicapped by not having the necessary materials needed to convince naysayers.  So, he sailed back to California and obtained these by single-handedly surveying the entire route himself. 
As he had promised, Judah located a suitable grade over Donner Pass, running 115 miles from Sacramento to the Nevada state line. 
On November 1, 1860 he wrote up a loose incorporation for the "Central Pacific Railroad Company of California" but could find no financial support in San Francisco.
With no interested in San Francisco he traveled east to nearby Sacramento and located four businessmen eager and willing for just such a railroad; Charles Crocker, Collis P. Huntington, Mark Hopkins, and Leland Stanford. 
These individuals carried the monetary support necessary for incorporation under California state law (which in this case totaled $115,000 (or $1,000 per mile) and as a result, the Central Pacific Railroad of California (CP) was born on June 28, 1861. 
Sadly, despite all his hard work, the so-called "Big Four" eventually pushed their chief engineer out of the picture.   
Before Judah's death on November 2, 1863 (while attempting to wrest control from the group) he was able to witness the Pacific Railroad Act became law on July 1, 1862 with President Lincoln's signature  To see a complete transcript of this act please click here. 
It was directed to: "construct a railroad and telegraph line from the Pacific coast, at or near San Francisco, or the navigable waters of the Sacramento River, to the eastern boundary of California."   
With the passage of this act the CP adopted the agreement on October 7th and formally accepted it through the Department of the Interior on December 24th. To actually build the railroad, however, would require a great deal of land grants.  
Arquivo - 029
Thanks to Senators Stephen A. Douglas (Illinois) and William R. King (Alabama) there was legislation drawn up for this purpose in 1850, which assisted in establishing new railroads west of the Mississippi River.
John Stover's book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," notes that between 1850 and 1871 the U.S. government offered railroads 170 million acres of land to construct 80 different initiatives. During this time about 131 million acres were actually used, which helped build 18,738 miles of new railroad.
One of the first to utilize land grants was the Illinois Central, which completed its original main line in 1856.  For the Union Pacific and Central Pacific, they would receive ten alternate sections of federal land for each mile of track laid (or roughly 6,000 acres). 
According to the book, "Union Pacific Railroad," by historians Joe Welsh and Kevin Holland, an amended Pacific Railroad Act of 1864 increased this figure to twenty alternate sections (or around 12,000 acres for every mile completed).  Additionally, there were government loans which varied from $16,000 to $48,000 per mile (depending on the topography). 
For Central Pacific, there was a catch, however; it was required to complete 50 miles within its first two years, 50 miles each year afterwards and be finished entirely by July 1, 1876 or lose all rights to its land grants and forfeiture of federal loans.  On January 8, 1863 the CP formally got underway during a ceremony held in Sacramento. 
Curiously, only two members of the five founders were present, Governor Stanford (elected in 1861) and Charles Crocker; Huntington was in New York attempting to procure additional funding, Judah was back in the Sierras surveying, and Mark Hopkins simply wasn't interested in attending.
Although both companies' track crews worked at a marvelously feverish pace, the Transcontinental Railroad wasn't exactly a fluid concept. 
It was slow in developing even after President Lincoln signed the 1862 act into law, which did not stipulate a meeting point aside from Central Pacific reaching the Nevada border and Union Pacific heading west of Omaha. 
After CP's groundbreaking, UP officials became increasingly impatient to get started; while this was technically not a race, all those involved clearly understood that whoever built more mileage would garner more money through loans and land grants. 
The UP (formally organized in May of 1863) was the only one actually created under the 1862 act; while Dodge fought for the Omaha routing, and later became a prominent figure in its construction, he was initially lured away to do his part in the Civil War. 
This left Thomas C. Durant (As vice president and general manager, he was the most influential player at Union Pacific and was eventually successful in pulling Dodge away from the Army.) in control along with Peter Day (chief engineer), Samuel B. Reed (chief of construction), and the wealthy Ames brothers from Boston (Oliver and Oakes) who provided vital financial assistance. 
Union Pacific held its official groundbreaking ceremony on December 1, 1863, which included a great deal more pomp and circumstance than CP's; the governor of Nebraska Territory, Alvin Saunders, turned the first shovel of dirt while the day was filled with fireworks, cannon salutes, bands, and much more. 
Unfortunately, UP encountered controversy before work even got underway.  As means of procuring the necessary capital and protecting stockholders' investments, a separate company was formed to handle all construction contracts. 
Arquivo - 030
It was the idea of George Francis Train who, with Durant's blessing and assistance, purchased a small Pennsylvania company, the Pennsylvania Fiscal Agency, for $50,000 in March of 1864.  They subsequently renamed it the Crédit Mobilier of America. 
As Mr. Ambrose's book details the scheme worked by having UP award contracts to paper corporations/individuals who then assigned them to Crédit Mobilier; essentially, all monies (largely federal loans) flowed through this company. 
It would then purchase UP stocks and bonds at par and sell them for a profit. It mattered not whether the railroad actually made money, or was even finished; those involved with Crédit Mobilier would reap huge profits. 
It became a major scandal that nearly bankrupted the railroad. The extra profits were then merely pocketed by Durant and his partners. The issue wasn't resolved until 1872 although little punishment was ever handed down to those responsible.
By December of 1864, Dey had graded some 23 miles west of Omaha but was then told to change the route (following Mud Creek) in an attempt to amass additional profits for Crédit Mobilier and more land grants.  Disgusted, he resigned on December 7th and was later replaced by Greenville Dodge. 
It took Durant several years to finally persuade the noted engineer to leave the army.  When the Transcontinental Railroad got underway, Dodge originally agreed to join UP once the war was over.  When hostilities ended and he still failed to show, Durant became exasperated. 
At the time, Dodge was leading regiments west of the Missouri River as head of the Department of the Missouri to eliminate the Indian threat which stretched from the Plains to the Rocky Mountains.  He finally signed on with Union Pacific in the spring of 1866 and was given complete authority. 
Like Judah at Central Pacific, no other individual was quite as important to Union Pacific as Greenville Dodge; he brought strong, militaristic leadership that got things done quickly and efficiently.  He was further aided by an army of Irish veterans, who were already well-versed in taking orders.
There is no doubt that Union Pacific's feat was masterful in its own right although it can be strongly argued that Central Pacific's endeavor was more impressive given its private incorporation and the added difficulty of laying a grade through the rugged Sierra Nevada's. 
It also had to ship all new equipment, supplies, and construction materials 15,000 miles around South America's Cape Horn to reach California.
In his book, "Southern Pacific Railroad," author Brian Solomon points out that actual work commenced some ten months after the formal groundbreaking festivities.
While the Chinese workers worked tirelessly and efficiently, it was Collis Huntington who kept the money flowing and things on schedule; the CP got underway from downtown Sacramento near the Sacramento River waterfront with an initial task of bridging the American River a few miles to the west. 
On October 26, 1863 the first rails were spiked down and soon, tracks reached nearby 21st Street. 
Arquivo - 031
Just a few weeks later, on November 10th, the company's first locomotive, the 46-ton, 4-4-0 Governor Stanford (an 1862 product of the Norris Locomotive Works, this machine is preserved today at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento), made its first run over this stretch, which drew great fanfare.
Tunnel 1 is Located at Grizzly Hill, 514.7 feet in length. The bore was widened in 1913 to support double-tracking.
Tunnel 2 is Situated about 1 mile east of Emigrant Gap, this bore was 271 feet in length; daylighted 1923-1924.
Tunnel 3 is This bore is at Milepost 180.7 near Cisco.  When originally built it was 280 feet in length.
Tunnel 4 is Very near Tunnel 3 at Milepost 181, it was originally 92 feet in length.
Tunnel 5 is Located only four miles west of Tunnel 4 at Milepost 185, it was 128 feet in length; daylighted in 1895.
Tunnel 6 is The famous bore in the Sierras also known as "Summit Tunnel" it was 1,659 feet in length.  The structure was bypassed in 1997.
Tunnel 7 is Situated at Milepost 194.1 it is 100 feet in length; later daylighted and then covered with a snowshed before being abandoned.
Tunnel 8 is This structure sits at Milepost 194.3 near Black Point.  It is 375 feet in length and is no longer in service.
Tunnel 9 is This bore is located at Milepost 194.9 and is 216 feet in length; now abandoned.
Tunnel 10 is This tunnel is at Milepost 195.1 and is 509 feet in length; now abandoned.
Tunnel 11 is Based at Milepost 195.4 it is 577 feet in length, now abandoned.
Tunnel 12 is At Milepost 195.7 it is only a mile west of Tunnel 11; the structure is 342 feet in length and is now abandoned.
Tunnel 13 is Situated at Milepost 200.1 near Andover it is the second-longest at 870 feet in length.
Tunnel 14 is Located at Milepost 222 it is 200 feet in length and was bypassed following a line change in 1913.
Tunnel 15 is Located at milepost 225 (Quartz Spur); originally 96 feet in length.  The bore was daylighted in 1895 and the grade was abandoned in 1913 following a line change.
By early 1864 the relatively gentle topography directly east of Sacramento allowed crews to complete 22 miles quite quickly. 
On March 25th, the very same Governor Stanford pulled a load of granite from nearby mines, which provided the Central Pacific its first revenue freight earnings.  On May 13, 1865 service opened to Auburn, a location that also marked the Sierra's foothills. 
The right-of-way roughly followed the North Fork of the American River as it passed through Colfax, Dutch Flat, and Emigrant Gap before reaching Summit Tunnel (tunnel #6) near present-day Norden. 
As its name implied, this bore was situated at the summit of Donner Pass and was the longest of the fifteen tunnels needed through the mountains (excluding snow sheds); it was 1,659 feet in length and 124 feet deep. It was finished in August of 1867 a full year since it had all began (August 27, 1866). 
It sat a 7,042 feet above sea-level and was blasted out of the mountain using nothing more than picks, shovels, black powder, nitroglycerin, and considerable sweat and blood. It had so delayed ongoing work that grading crews had pushed ahead into Nevada months earlier. 
After Summit Tunnel received its rails on November 30, 1867 the pace quickened and on June 18, 1868 the CP's tracks reached Reno, Nevada (154 miles east of Sacramento). 
By then, Greenville Dodge was blazing his way across the Great Plains.  In some cases, graders were some 200 miles ahead of track-layers! 
The UP's progress was as follows: by late July of 1866 it stretched 153 miles to Grand Island; on October 6th rails were 247 miles west of Omaha; and finally by September 21, 1868 the line had reached the Green River, more than 750 miles from the Missouri River. 
The speed of construction led to the infamous "Hell On Wheels," a traveling town which followed the railroad. 
It was little more than a collection of partying, gambling, drinking, and promiscuous behavior enabling workers to relax after a hard day's work.  
Arquivo - 032
While Union Pacific's leadership struggled to keep this wildness under control the bigger issue turned out to be Indians.  At first, UP had no trouble and the local Pawnee even assisted in the work.
However, west of central Nebraska the Cheyenne and Sioux were not so friendly; these tribes regularly attacked survey parties and construction crews in an attempt to turn back the white man.
Dodge initially felt his men could deal with the problem directly by remaining armed at all times.  But with victims being horribly mutilated and the attacks continuing, federal troops were eventually required.
The last year of construction, particularly the final six months, were a blitzkrieg; once the Central Pacific cleared the Sierra's they raced eastward across the Nevada desert while Union Pacific did the same through Wyoming. 
As each railroad entered Utah the race took on a whole new meaning with both wanting to build just a little further than the other; CP had survey crews as far as east as Echo Canyon, Utah and UP as far west as Humboldt Wells, Nevada. 
It was more than just pride, however.  As the book, "Railroads In The Days Of Steam," notes the government was paying upwards of $96,000 for every new mile the Transcontinental Railroad constructed, which included a 400-foot-wide right-of-way. 
Obviously, not only did more mileage mean more territory but also greater revenue.  The issue came to head in early 1869 when Union Pacific and Central Pacific grading crews met between Ogden and Promontory where, in some cases, they were only a few feet apart! 
Neither side wanted to give in although it was obvious time, money, effort, and resources were being wasted.  Today, these redundant grades can still be seen.  Finally, on April 9, 1869 Greenville Dodge and Collis Huntington met in Washington, D.C. and agreed the official meeting point would be Promontory Summit, Utah.
Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, Greenville Dodge originally considered crossing the Great Salt Lake via a causeway as the Union Pacific approached Ogden.
Although an incredibly expensive endeavor, doing so would have offered easier grades and fewer miles. 
However, when the lake was sounded he discovered it to be 14 feet higher in 1868 than it had been nineteen years earlier.  As a result, he deemed the project unfeasible.  In the end, the great lake was crossed. 
Several decades later, in 1899, plans commenced on a water level route that would directly span the lake to its north with Lucin as the western terminus of the old alignment.
The Ogden & Lucin Railroad was a paper company created for the express purpose of building the Lucin Cutoff and work officially began in March of 1902. 
Arquivo - 033
It was originally hoped the route would be a complete causeway, similar to what was built later. However, construction techniques at the time, while advanced, were not able to stabilize the right-of-way, as it kept sinking below the water's surface.
As a result, engineers decided on a more conventional approach; long earthen approaches built of stone-fill with a wooden trestle in the center.  The cutoff officially opened on January 1, 1905. 
Surprisingly, the old Promontory Branch remained in service for several years until it was finally abandoned during June of 1942. In June of 1959 a new causeway replaced the original structure.
As part of the deal, Central Pacific purchased Union Pacific's trackage from Ogden to Promontory Summit (totaling about 50 miles) for $4 million.  The agreement was also spurred for monetary reasons as the newly elected President Ulysses S. Grant put an end to public subsidies. 
And, just like that, the Transcontinental Railroad's "Great Race" was over; Union Pacific was finished first, reaching Ogden (1,028 miles from Omaha) on March 7, 1869. 
Central Pacific required another month but by April 17th had finished to Monument Point, more than 700 miles east of Sacramento and just 20 miles west of Promontory Summit. 
The two railroads' grand ceremony and meeting was originally scheduled for May 8th but due to heavy rains in the Weber Canyon, Union Pacific's train was delayed.  As a result, the festivities were pushed back to Monday, May 10th. 
There was also the train crews; Central Pacific's 4-4-0 #60, "The Jupiter," was headed by George Booth (engineer), R.A. Murphy (fireman), and Eli Dennison (conductor) while Union Pacific's 4-4-0 #119 had Sam Bradford at engineer, Cyrus Sweet as fireman, and Benjamin Mallory (conductor). 
The famous "Golden Spike" was the work of David Hewes from San Francisco, a businessman who wanted to invest in the CP project from the start but did not have the money to do so. 
The intricate decoration was six inches long but not of solid gold.  Instead, only a large, 18-ounce gold nugget sat atop it with the entire piece was valued at $350 (today, it is preserved at Stanford University).   
Finally, there was a "Last Tie" crafted from beautiful laurel wood and a silver-headed hammer.  Once everything was in place, Stanford was given the honor of driving the spike; afterwards a local telegrapher wired the word "Done!"  With that, great celebrations erupted throughout the country. 
The Transcontinental Railroad's most famous image was taken when The Jupiter and Union Pacific's 4-4-0 #119 were photographed coupler-to-coupler as many dignitaries and patrons surrounded the locomotives.
Today, you can see two of the original Golden Spikes (a total of six were used); the original is housed at the Cantor Arts Center at Stanford University and another is on display at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento. 





Página 8 - https://www.american-rails.com/1870s.html

Arquivo - 034
While railroads continued their rapid expansion during the 1870s the decade nevertheless contained its share of issues; 1873's financial panic crippled America's economy while the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 left an ugly scar on the industry. 
Despite these setbacks, historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," the U.S. rail network grew from 52,900 in 1870 to 93,200 by 1880 (by region the Mid-Atlantic saw a 42% increase, the South 55%, the "Old Northwest" 70%, and the West 151%). 
By 1880, all the states, and territories which later became states, boasted at least a few miles of track.  In the west, the Transcontinental Railroad had just been finished (1869) while eastern systems focused on reaching Chicago. 
One notable was the Baltimore & Ohio, America's first common-carrier, which arrived in the Windy City in 1875.  
While the construction and consolidation of carriers west of the Mississippi was still ongoing, back east the railroads we now commonly refer to as classic "fallen flags" were either already established or soon to be. 
In an era prior to government oversight, arrogant and pompous owners continued (although in declining numbers) to cause inefficient operations by refusing interchange and maintaining their own track gauge.  
By the 1870's, American railroads were quickly transforming themselves into the modern incarnation we recognize today. 
Many of the well-known freight car types were already in service (boxcars, flatcars, hoppers, tank cars, gondolas, and the caboose). 
Passenger amenities were also vastly improving; the first diner appeared in 1867, sleeping cars were operating in ever-greater numbers, chair cars (a type of upscale coach featuring plush, reclining, swivel seats) were first used in 1875, and even central heating (via steam) was in the experimental stages. 
For all of these advancements, the decade had its problems.  It began with the financial Panic of 1873. 
Railroads were growing so fast that nearly 6,000 miles were being laid down every year (17,000 miles between 1871 and 1873).  With so much new construction, lending was strained and overextended. 
It ultimately collapsed when Jay Cooke's banking firm, Jay Cooke & Company, could not sell the $100 million in bonds needed for the Northern Pacific Railway's construction, our country's first transcontinental railroad into the Pacific Northwest. 
Arquivo - 035
The NP failed on September 18, 1873, which set off a chain reaction of bank failures that led to a national depression.
According to the book, "Railroads In The Days Of Steam" by authors Albert McCready and Lawrence Sagle, as a rare federal charter Northern Pacific was provided 25,600 acres of public land for each new mile constructed. 
Following its bankruptcy the government attempted to revoke this charter but such draconian measures were spared when new ownership managed to procure further funding and see its completion by 1883.   
Economic issues were not the only concern facing railroads: America's Heartland was filled with angry Native Americans who were not happy about the White Man's encroachment onto their lands. 
Whenever possible they routinely destroyed track, derailed trains, and disrupted operations.  It was a serious problem during Union Pacific's construction in the 1860's as grading and track crews were constantly harassed. 
In response, the U.S. government provided military support. After several years of bloodshed, capped by the famous Battle At Little Big Horn where Colonel George A. Custer's Seventh Calvary was annihilated by the Sioux Nation (led by Crazy Horse), most of the fighting had ended by 1877. 
The 1870's also saw new Midwestern startups like the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe pushing westward across the plains and into the southwest.
According to Keith Bryant, Jr.'s excellent book, "History Of The Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway," the AT&SF began as the Atchison & Topeka Railroad of 1859.  After spreading across the Midwest, new leadership under William Barstow Strong in 1877 allowed it to reach California by 1883.
The Southern Pacific was also feverishly building that decade, working its way east from the San Joaquin Valley towards the Gulf Coast.
The SP served most of Southern California by the end of the 1860's; under the leadership of Collis P. Huntington it reached El Paso, Texas in 1881 and New Orleans, Louisiana soon afterward. 
This corridor became its legendary "Sunset Route."  While westward expansion was underway railroads also grew prodigiously back east. 
As the 1870's dawned, Southern railroads were still recovering from the Civil War's ravages. But within a decade they had rebounded handsomely, gaining 55% of their 1870 mileage (or, over 19,000 miles). 
The 1870's also witnessed the four major eastern trunk lines either complete their Chicago corridors or nearly so (Erie Railroad). 
Arquivo - 036
The Pennsylvania Railroad had arrived decades earlier, in 1852, while the future New York Central System provided a direct link in 1873 when owner Cornelius Vanderbilt named himself president of the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern.  The Baltimore & Ohio reached the Windy City a few years later, in 1875, although indirectly.
Riding The Rails In The 1870's. The following was written by James Macaulay and published in London's, "Across The Ferry" in 1887.  It was reprinted in August Mencken's book, "The Railroad Passenger Car," and describes what it was like to ride in a Pullman car during the 1870's: 
"The average speed on the American lines is about twenty miles an hour.  The express trains rarely exceed thirty miles.  Nominally, there i but one class of passengers and one scale of fare. 
Every traveler takes his place where he has a fancy except that there is a car reserved for ladies and for gentlemen accompanying them. 
But though in theory all are equal there are practically various classes of immigrants.  There are attached to most trains drawing-room cars, reclining chair car and sleeping-cars, for which additional charge is made. 
Some of these select cars belong to speculating builders or companies who purchase the privilege of attaching them to the trains and make their profit by the additional charge.
The most notable of these speculations are the Pullman hotel-cars.  In one of these I traveled from Niagara to Chicago, leaving in the forenoon and arriving on the morning of the following day. 
Two of us chartered a compartment like the cabin of a ship with a comfortable sofa above which a board was fixed at night, so as to form a second sleeping-berth. 
The beds are regularly made, boots put outside the door for cleaning, and hot water brought in the morning by an active black boy. 
Meals were served on a table carried into the cabin.  The bill-of-fare contained many items and at moderate charges. 
For lamb chop or mutton chop and tomato sauce the price was seventy-five cents; fresh mackerel, fifty cents; omelet with ham, forty cents and a spring chicken cost a dollar. 
There was ample choice of vegetables, fruit and relishes with five or six kinds of wine in the carte.  A cup of French coffee, tea or chocolate was fifteen cents.  The kitchen, clean and commodious, had every appliance for cooking, and the dressing compartment was equally convenient. 
Some of the drawing-room cars are as luxurious as those of royal or imperial carriages on European lines, with mirrors, lounges, chandeliers, piano and bookcases.  A novelty in some of the cars on the Pacific Line is an outside balcony from which the scenery can be surveyed.
Arquivo - 037
In America the ingenuity of the directors seems to be exerted for the comfort of the poorest classes. The carriages are large and well ventilated, with stoves for wintry weather and Venetian blinds and sun shades at every window in Summer. 
The seats are roomy and well cushioned.  For parcels or small packages there are plenty of pegs and wire racks, and there is a barrel of filtered water, iced in Summer, at one end of the car.  Notwithstanding all this, there is room for improvement.  The jumping and jolting of man of the lines is terrible. 
The rails are laid upon big wooden sleepers which seem often of needless irregularity in level.  Great is the dust and glare in hot weather and the draft in cold weather. 
Except in the larger towns and at the hotel stations the depots are generally very plain wooden structures, with few fixings and at night cheerless and ill lighted."
According to the book, "Baltimore & Ohio Railroad" by Kirk Reynolds and David Oroszi, the B&O's through route, via Pittsburgh, was not established until 1891 thanks to the efforts of President John W. Garrett, who became the railroad's seventh president on November 17, 1858. 
Upon the road's push towards Chicago he stated, "...he would pull down the temple of high freight rates upon the heads of rival lines like the biblical Samson."  The Erie Railroad was the last, making its entrance during the 1880's via acquisition of the Chicago & Atlantic Railway. 
The standard track gauge of 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches became increasingly common during the 1870's although numerous widths still persisted. 
For instance, roughly six different gauges could be found throughout the country: 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches (found predominantly in the Northeast and Midwest); 4 feet, 10 inches (Ohio); 5 feet (South/Southeast); 5 feet, 4 inches; 5 feet, 6 inches; 6 feet; and the Pennsylvania Railroad used a gauge of 4 feet, 9 inches.
As a historical footnote, the gauge of 4 foot, 8 1/2 inches was adopted from England; that country's horse carriages largely used this width and so the concept was applied to early railroads of the 1820's.
The 1870s' final significant development was the adoption of Standard Time Zones. Since the actual time of day could vary greatly, from a few minutes to several (depending on one's location), a better system was needed. 
This was particularly true following the Transcontinental Railroad's completion where the western time differed by hours.  Such an arrangement made it impossible for railroads to precisely coordinate schedules, an issue they didn't particularly mind at the time given the rabid level of competition. 
According to the book, "The Railroad Passenger Car: And Illustrated History Of The First Hundred Years With Accounts By Contemporary Passengers" by August Mencken, Charles Ferdinand Dowd was the first to propose a standard time within a pamphlet he published in 1870 entitled, "A System of National Time for the Railroads."  This piece became the basis for the industry's standard time. 
Dowd was an 1853 graduate of Yale University (boasting a doctorate) who believed the country should be divided into four sections.  These segments would cover 15 degrees of longitude, or an hour of real time.  As the years passed the idea slowly gained traction although more than a decade would pass before it found widespread use. 
In 1876, William Allen, secretary of the Time Table Convention (which later became the General Time Convention), planned the four major time zones railroads would use.  
Arquivo - 038
Narrow-Gauge Railroads. The 1870's witnessed a unique phenomenon take root, the narrow-gauge railroad. 
While the Erie had been built to 6-foot gauge; 5 feet was standard in the South; and 4 feet, 9 inches adopted by the Pennsylvania Railroad, a growing consortium in the post-Civil War era believed narrower gauge operation could save considerable construction and operational costs. 
While these widths had been used for some time in other parts of the world, notably Britain where Isaac W. Boulton showcased a 2-foot gauge locomotive on 1 mile of track near Wigan, Lancashire in 1861, it did not gain considerable traction in America until trade publications (principally Railway Age) picked up Robert Francis Fairlie's paper on the subject entitled Railway Gauges. 
His writing strongly touted the advantages of the 3-foot gauge.  General William J. Palmer, a decorated U.S. Army officer of the Civil War, was already so convinced of its advantages he went his own way and swiftly organized the Denver & Rio Grande Railway on October 27, 1870. 
The D&RG became America's first, and most successful 3-foot railroad; by 1887 it boasted 1,673 miles in operation throughout Colorado according to Dr. George Hilton's book, "American Narrow Gauge Railroads." 
Narrow-gauge construction reached a fever pitch during the 1880's but its apparent advantages were quickly dashed; many were built very poorly and interchange with standard-gauge railroads made it very inefficient. 
Most were converted to 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches by the 1920's.  Surprisingly, components of what later became the Denver & Rio Grande Western survived until 1980!
They were listed by geographical location: Eastern, Central, Mountain and Pacific. These zones lay along the 75th (Eastern), 90th (Central), 105th (Mountain) and 120th (Pacific) meridians. 
Following more effort and work, significant organizations pushed for Standard Time's passage including the American Association for the Advancement of Scenic, American Metrological Society, and American Society of Civil Engineers. 
Canadian Pacific's chief engineer, Sir Sanford Fleming, took an even bolder step, stating in 1879 that a similar system should be used worldwide. 
Finally, the American Railway Association, the industry's trade group at the time (which became the Association of American Railroads on October 12, 1934), adopted the proposal and it became effective on November 18, 1883.   
Dowd was recognized for his efforts by being awarded a lifetime pass on any railroad.  In an ironic and cruel twist of fate, he was killed by a train at Saratoga, New York on November 12, 1904.  



Página 9 - https://www.american-rails.com/sp.html

Arquivo - 039
The Southern Pacific (SP) was one of America's most successful and widely recognized railroads.  Its name stands alongside notables like the Santa Fe, Union Pacific, Pennsylvania, Baltimore & Ohio, and Illinois Central. 
The "Espee" carries a heritage tied to one of the most important events in American history, completion of the Transcontinental Railroad. 
Afterwards, Central Pacific's so-called "Big Four" (Collis P. Huntington, Leland Stanford, Charles Crocker, and Mark Hopkins) jockeyed for total control of California's transportation network.  To do so, they created the Southern Pacific and rapidly expanded their new enterprise throughout the Golden State. 
Their system eventually became so large it stretched from Portland, Oregon to New Orleans, Louisiana.  In addition, a multitude of celebrated subsidiaries comprised SP's network like the Texas & New Orleans, Cotton Belt, and the great Pacific Electric Railway. 
Over time, it blossomed into the most far-reaching of all the classic American railroads with a network totaling 17,000 miles after its 1988 merger with the Denver & Rio Grande Western. 
Alas, poor management in the decades following World War II greatly weakened this proud carrier as neglect and failed mergers saw its acquisition by Union Pacific in 1996.  Today, given Southern Pacific's impressive size and scope most of its principal lines remain in regular service.
The vaunted Southern Pacific name carries a complex history although its immediate heritage can be traced back to the Transcontinental Railroad's completion. 
When the Central Pacific (CP) and Union Pacific met on May 10, 1869 at Promontory Summit, Utah the West was opened to new means of economic development and settlement, enabling travelers to take cross-country trips in mere days instead of months. 
Following this milestone, CP's "Big Four" maneuvered to dominate Californian trade.  Their first task involved opening service beyond Sacramento, directly into Oakland/San Francisco. 
According to a 1933 piece released by the Southern Pacific Historical & Technical Society entitled, "Historical Outline, Southern Pacific Company, March 1933," the original Southern Pacific Railroad had no ties to either the modern company or the "Big Four." 
That corporation's chartering took place on December 2, 1865 and, as Bill Yenne's book, "The History Of The Southern Pacific," notes it was given Congressional authority on July 27, 1866 to establish another transcontinental route from San Francisco to the Colorado River at California's southeastern border.  There, it would meet the Atlantic & Pacific Railway building east from St. Louis.
San Francisco Overland: Until 1955 operated in conjunction with UP and C&NW between Los Angeles and Chicago. Afterward operated only west to St. Louis via the Wabash Railroad.
While the project did include some new construction it was greatly aided by the February 4, 1868 acquisition of the San Francisco & San Jose Railroad, which linked its namesake towns. 
Arquivo - 040
For a brief time it appeared the "Big Four" might actually have to share the state's transportation services with this independent railroad. 
Such an unthinkable scenario proved short-lived, though, when they purchased the original Southern Pacific on September 29, 1869.  In a complicated series of corporate shakeups the SP combined operations with CP in 1870 (the former did not officially lease the latter until April 1, 1885). 
On November 11, 1869 the "Big Four" completed an extension from Sacramento to the San Francisco Bay at Oakland through two subsidiaries known as the Western Pacific Railroad (no relation to the well-known WP built decades later) and San Francisco Bay Railroad. 
According to Brian Solomon's book, "Southern Pacific Railroad," the group then formed a new Southern Pacific Railroad on October 12, 1870 to obtain the original and others mentioned (including CP). 
A further corporate layer was added on August 14, 1884 when the Southern Pacific Company was created in Kentucky to manage all properties under the "Big Four's" direction.
The Southern Pacific began its march out of the Bay Area in March of 1869 when it opened an extension 30 miles south of San Jose to Gilroy. 
Beyond, it passed through the San Joaquin Valley reaching Modesto (November, 1870), Fresno (May, 1872), and Bakersfield (November, 1874) before dispatching its first train to Los Angeles (then a town of less than 10,000 residents) on September 5, 1876.   
As the work trekked south, surveyors ran into a major problem 32 miles outside of Bakersfield, the Tehachapi Mountains.  To tackle this rugged stretch of topography the "Big Four" hired engineer William Hood who designed an impressive route containing eastbound ruling grades (compensated) of only 2.52% while westbound grades (compensated) were an even gentler 1.36%. 
The line reached the summit at 4,025 feet although its most endearing feature lay nine miles below where a sweeping loop allowed Hood to keep grades manageable while gaining an additional 77 feet in elevation.   
Today, the fabled Tehachapi Loop remains in regular use by both Union Pacific (owner) and BNSF Railway (lessor).  After arriving in Los Angeles, the SP expanded in all directions.  
The first decision involved continuing east to the Colorado River at Fort Yuma, Arizona.  That extension was completed in May of 1877 and with the Atlantic & Pacific bogged down by financial problems the "Big Four" pressed on after successfully amending their railroad's charter. 
It enabled them to reach Texas where the SP would meet the Texas & Pacific Railway (then under Jay Gould's control) at El Paso.  After just four years of construction the latter point was reached on May 19, 1881.  With the T&P still 100 miles away Huntington elected to continue building eastward and arrived in Sierra Blanca by November 25th. 
This decision greatly angered Gould and the two parties went to court over the matter.  It was finally resolved when they signed the "Gould-Huntington Agreement" on November 26, 1881, which gave the T&P trackage rights over the SP from Sierra Blanca to El Paso but also forfeited the former's charter and franchises west of that point (awarded to SP). 
Arquivo - 041
The speed at which Huntington raced across the Southwest was, indeed, quite impressive. By January 12, 1883 his railroad was complete to Pecos, a location where it met the Galveston, Harrisburg & San Antonio Railway, another Huntington-controlled system that had been building west from San Antonio. 
Through this subsidiary, and control of the Louisiana & Texas Railroad & Steamship Company, the SP offered through service from Los Angeles to New Orleans over the newly christened "Sunset Route" (In 1881, Huntington picked up another property known as the Texas & New Orleans Railroad.  In 1927, all of SP's subsidiaries in Texas and Louisiana, except for the "Cotton Belt," were operated under the T&NO name.)
In 1884 the SP maintained a commanding 4,711-mile network, including all subsidiaries and leased properties. 
By then, Collis Huntington's held complete control after the "Big Four" had fragmented: Mark Hopkins died on March 29, 1878; Crocker sold out in 1871 but came back in 1873 as a minority owner until his death on August 14, 1888; finally, Leland Stanford and Huntington had an increasingly strained relationship resulting in the former handing over the presidency to the latter on February 28, 1890. 
Throughout the 1880's, Huntington continued growing his empire; not only did he dominate rail service throughout the Golden State but also eyed expansion toward the Puget Sound. 
He would later lose his grip on California when the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe's William Barstow Strong outmaneuvered the tycoon and broke up his monopoly. -
The SP accessed Redding in 1872 through a subsidiary known as the California & Oregon Railroad (C&O).  This system carried a history dating back to 1865 (acquired by CP in 1870); it was envisioned to connect Marysville, California with Portland, Oregon but only succeeded in doing so with the "Big Four's" financial backing.
After a decade of dormancy, the C&O was extended to Ashland, Oregon in 1887.  There it met the similarly-named Oregon & California Railroad (O&C, originally known as the Oregon Central Railroad), led by Henry Villard, which had built south from Portland. 
That same year the then-bankrupt O&C was acquired.  During a formal last spike ceremony (driven by Charles Crocker) on December 17th the Southern Pacific established a new corridor to Portland, better known as the Siskiyou Line which formed part of its "Shasta Route." 
By 1890, SP owned a network of 8,000 route miles and as it continued growing formed the classic system remembered so well today.  In 1901 it completed the fabled "Coast Line," which offered a direct route from San Francisco to Los Angeles, via San Luis Obispo and Santa Barbara. 
It was along this corridor, featuring breathtaking scenes of the Pacific Ocean, that SP unveiled its wildly successful Coast Daylight streamliner on March 21, 1937.  Thanks to this train's popularity an entire fleet was launched in the succeeding years with names like the Sacramento Daylight, San Joaquin Daylight, and Shasta Daylight.
Collis Huntington leadership ended with his death on August 13, 1900.  He had built an impressive railroad which roughly formed a crescent moon shape extending from Portland, Oregon to New Orleans via California and the American Southwest. 
Arquivo - 042
In 1901, another noted mogul, Edward Harriman, acquired a 45% stake in SP; his reign lasted less than a decade when he died on September 9, 1909.  However, during his brief stint he greatly improved the property by funneling millions into rebuilding bridges, double-tracking key sections of main line, and purchasing new locomotives/equipment. 
Two of his most noteworthy projects included upgrading the Shasta Route and building the Lucin Cutoff.  The former improved SP's Portland gateway by circumventing the steep, circuitous, and grade-riddled (as high as 3.3%) Siskiyou Line.  What was known as the Natron Cutoff, or Cascade Line, began during the Harriman era and headed east/southeast from Eugene. 
It passed to the east of Crater Lake and through the Cascade Mountains but required over a decade to finish due to ongoing legal issues surrounding Harriman's ownership of both the Union Pacific and Southern Pacific (the two were separated following a Supreme Court ruling in December of 1912).  There was also the Modoc Line which opened in 1929 at a cost of $16 million; it acted as an inside gateway between southern Oregon and western Nevada.
The Natron Cutoff was finally completed in February of 1926 where it reconnected with the Siskiyou Line at Black Butte, California.  The original Lucin Cutoff, a combined 16-mile causeway and 12-mile wooden trestle, pierced the center of the Great Salt Lake. It opened in 1903 at a cost of $8.4 million. 
This undertaking not only reduced grades by circumventing the lake's northern shore but also reduced 44 miles from the Ogden main line. 
Throughout the 1920's the "Espee" continued its expansion program; on October 31, 1924 it purchased the 1,200-mile El Paso & Southwestern Railroad from the Phelps, Dodge Corporation for $64 million and then, nearly a decade later, added the much larger, 1,500-mile St. Louis Southwestern Railway on April 19, 1932. 
The EP&SW largely served the same territory as the SP with a main line running from Benson, Arizona to El Paso.  However, it did contain one important segment, a north-south line linking El Paso with Tucumcari, New Mexico where it met the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific (Rock Island). 
This interchange proved very important and became part of the railroads' Golden State Route as they worked closely in handling business between Chicago and Los Angeles.  The St. Louis Southwestern, better known as the "Cotton Belt," carried even greater importance with lines connecting Texas with St. Louis.
The Southern Pacific is credited with launching one of the most successful and glamorous streamliners ever put into service when the previously-mentioned Coast Daylight debuted in 1937.  Ironically, only two decades later the railroad became disenchanted with these trains. 
First, it dropped its beautiful two-tone orange "Daylight" livery in favor of a simplified red/grey scheme and then reduced the fleet until only a few services remained by the time Amtrak began on May 1, 1971.  In the postwar years, SP increasingly turned its attention to freight; it fully dieselized in 1957 and was an early proponent of modernization. 
The company was quick to utilize computers and install electronic hump yards (the first computerized hump yards opened in 1973 at West Colton, California) to increase efficiency.  It moved a wide variety of products at this time ranging from lumber, automobiles, steel and chemicals to petroleum, copper, agriculture, and trailer-on-flatcar (TOFC) service (after 1953). 
The latter transitioned into container-on-flatcar (COFC), or intermodal, which became a major source of traffic after the 1980's.  To meet this demand, SP purchased its first double-stack containers in 1981.  Of particular note was its once highly lucrative perishable business serving California's lush San Joaquin Valley. 
Arquivo - 043
In 1886 the railroad developed the first refrigerator car, or reefer, and later worked with Union Pacific to inaugurate Pacific Fruit Express (PFE).  As Mike Schafer notes in his book "Classic American Railroads," by 1962 the two owned some 22,000 reefers operating as part of dedicated time freights.
For all of the railroad’s historic wealth and prosperity (it even weathered the Great Depression without experiencing bankruptcy) traffic pattern shifts, coupled with poor management, proved costly.  Donald J. Russell, who took the helm on January 1, 1952, was the company's last great leader. 
He expected a well-run and well-maintained railroad on the cutting edge of innovation.  However, as Don Hofsommer points out in his article, "Not Only A Railroad, But An Empire: How SP Went From Mighty Octopus To Tarnished Suitor," from the March, 1998 issue of Trains Magazine, following his departure SP's fortunes took a turn for the worse. 
On May 17, 1972, Benjamin F. Biaggini succeeded Russell.  He was brought in for a singular purpose, diversification.  With much of the industry struggling after the 1950's many turned to holding companies as a means of expanding their portfolios to escape the transportation sector's cyclical nature. 
While financial difficulties were not being experienced at the time its board nevertheless felt the plan was important for long term growth.  In 1969 a new Southern Pacific Company was born and branched out into several different industries, including the purchase of Sprint, a telecommunications company.
In doing so, the railroad was neglected, a common theme from the holding company era.  As service rapidly declined and the country shifted from a manufacturing base to services, business evaporated.  Its once profitable automotive traffic and San Francisco industrial base disappeared as plants either closed or moved overseas. 
SP's perishable losses were a direct result of poor service, both of its own making and the disaster unfolding back east where Penn Central's collapse was being felt nationwide.  Farmers could ill-afford to lose their cash crops and, as a result, quickly abandoned trains for trucks. 
The SP's once sprawling network of branch lines and spurs throughout the valley, seemingly reaching every farm and field, had largely been abandoned by the 1980's.  In barely a decade one of the industry's stars, carrying a network of 15,039 route miles (including the Cotton Belt), was desperately trying to avoid bankruptcy. 
To do so, Southern Pacific sought merger with a stronger carrier.  It found one in the powerful and world-renowned Santa Fe. Steve Glischinski notes in his book, "Santa Fe Railway," the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe and SP announced on May 15, 1980 they would become one to form the Southern Pacific & Santa Fe Railway. 
Within months these talks ended but were renewed just three years later on September 27, 1983.  In these latest discussions a merger was approved, which created the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation.  While the two railroads remained separate their holding companies (Santa Fe Industries and Southern Pacific Company) were joined on December 23, 1983. 
In a stunning defeat, the Interstate Commerce Commission announced on July 24, 1986 that it had denied the marriage on monopolistic grounds.  The stillborn railroad had even adopted a new livery of red and yellow (dubbed the "Kodachrome" scheme), which had been applied to some locomotives and equipment.  Railfans facetiously dubbed it "Shouldn't Paint So Fast." 
Despite this setback, the SP did enjoy one bright spot that decade; in 1980 it acquired the bankrupt Rock Island's Golden State Route from Tucumcari to St. Louis, via Kansas City, operated by subsidiary Cotton Belt. 
A few years later Southern Pacific finally found a partner when Rio Grande Industries, parent to the Denver & Rio Grande Western (Rio Grande) purchased the railroad in 1988. 
Interestingly, in a nearly unheard of decision, Rio Grande elected to use the much more prominent Southern Pacific name instead of its own.  Combined, the two railroads formed a monstrous 17,340 mile system. 
A mere seven years later, in 1995, Union Pacific announced it would acquire the entire Southern Pacific as a counter-move to the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe merger.  The union was approved by the new Surface Transportation Board (successor to the Interstate Commerce Commission) and a much larger Union Pacific came to be on September 11, 1996. 
SP was so large that UP encountered a logistical nightmare that nearly resulted in total gridlock as yards clogged, transit times greatly increased, and operating ratios soared.   Unlike the Penn Central disaster, though, UP managed to work out the kinks.  Today, Southern Pacific's legacy lives on in its main lines and Amtrak's operation of its former passenger services.
Union Pacific also paid homage to several predecessors in 2005, including SP, by painting one of its new EMD SD70ACe locomotives into a version of the railroad’s famous Daylight passenger livery; it was numbered 1996 in honor of the year the railroad joined UP's system.




Página 10 - https://www.american-rails.com/crpcf.html

Arquivo - 044
From an operational standpoint the Central Pacific Railroad (CP) disappeared long ago and existed as a separate corporate entity only briefly before joining the Southern Pacific.  However, it holds an important place in American history by helping establish the Transcontinental Railroad in conjunction with the Union Pacific. 
When the two railroads met at Promontory Summit, Utah on May 10, 1869 the country was finally linked with ribbons of steel, thus opening the West to commerce, trade, and settlement.  This story is a fascinating tale of extreme hardship, determination, and virtually impossible odds. 
The project was similar to reaching the moon a century later; no one believed it could be done until it actually happened.  What's more, these men did it in a mere six years, hacking out new rights-of-way by hand.  
In many ways, Central Pacific's endeavor was the more difficult as it had to build through the formidable Sierra Nevada Mountains. 
One man knew it could be done, Theodore D. Judah, although he would fail to see "his" railroad completed.  Today, the route he chose remains in general use under successor Union Pacific.
The idea for what became the Transcontinental Railroad began long before the Civil War's outbreak.  According to the book, "The Northern Pacific, Main Street Of The Northwest: A Pictorial History" by author and historian Charles R. Wood in the spring of 1853 Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (who later became president of the Confederate States of America) dispatched survey crews west of the Mississippi River in an effort to find suitable corridors to the Pacific Coast.  
There were a total of eight different options put forth running various parallels from north to south.  However, with the ongoing issue of slavery Congress could not decide on which.  That all changed when Abraham Lincoln was elected the 16th President of the United States on November 6, 1860. 
Southern states immediately began to secede, starting with South Carolina on December 20, 1860.  As a result, Northern congressmen and senators had the freedom to choose whichever route the wished and settled upon the central option. 
This corridor had originally been conceived by noted engineer Greenville Dodge who believed departing from Omaha, Nebraska Territory was the most logical given its gentle grades along the Platte River nearly all the way into Colorado/Wyoming.  From there, a meeting point with the Central Pacific would be established somewhere between Utah Territory and the Nevada/California state line.
The Pacific Railroad Act was passed through Congress during the spring of 1862 (the House passed the bill on May 6th by a 79-49 margin while the Senate did the same on June 20th by a 35-5 margin) and signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln on July 1st. 
This legislation officially called for the creation of the aforementioned Union Pacific and provided the already-chartered Central Pacific (CP) with land grants and subsidies. 
In his book detailing the Transcontinental Railroad's construction, "The Men Who Built The Transcontinental Railroad, 1863-1869: Nothing Like It In The World," author Stephen Ambrose points out the Central Pacific would likely never have existed without the tireless efforts of Theodore Judah. 
While the so-called "Big Four" (Collis P. Huntington, Mark Hopkins, Leland Stanford, and Charles Crocker) are credited with financing and constructing the CP, Judah laid the groundwork.  As early as 1859 he began lobbying Congress to fund a railroad over the Sierra Nevada's Donner Pass, the only natural passageway through this otherwise impenetrable granite wall.
Arquivo - 045
Congress, even then, was excruciatingly slow at accomplishing anything and initially Judah struggled to make headway.  He finally caught a break in 1860 when he opened what was dubbed the "Pacific Railroad Museum" inside the Capitol building to promote the venture.  It was unveiled to the public on January 14th that year. 
Not surprisingly there were many doubters and Judah was severely handicapped by not having the necessary survey maps and charts to convince naysayers.  He wasted little time correcting this wrong and immediately sailed back to California with wife, Anna, and set about surveying the route on his own. 
It crossed the only natural passageway through the Sierras, Donner Pass, at an elevation of 7,056 feet and covered a total of 115 miles from the San Francisco Bay to Nevada state line.  While in San Francisco he wrote up a lose incorporation for the "Central Pacific Railroad Company of California" on November 1, 1860 but finding no support in that town traveled to nearby Sacramento. 
There, he found four local business owners eager and willing for just such a railroad; Charles Crocker, Collis P. Huntington, Mark Hopkins, and Leland Stanford.  With their monetary backing the group officially incorporated the Central Pacific Railroad of California on June 28, 1861.  
It was directed to "construct a railroad and telegraph line from the Pacific coast, at or near San Francisco, or the navigable waters of the Sacramento River, to the eastern boundary of California."  With the passage of the Pacific Railroad Act the CP adopted the agreement on October 7th and formally accepted it through the Department of the Interior on December 24th.
To aid in their efforts, Central Pacific was provided ten alternate sections in government land grants for each mile of track laid (or roughly 6,000 acres). According to the book, "Union Pacific Railroad," by historians Joe Welsh and Kevin Holland, an amended Pacific Railroad Act of 1864 increased this figure to twenty alternate sections (or around 12,000 acres for every mile completed). 
Additionally, there were federal loans varying from $16,000 to $48,000 per mile, depending on the topography's ruggedness.  As part of the deal, CP was required to complete 50 miles within its first two years, 50 miles each year thereafter, and be completed entirely by July 1, 1876 or lose its rights to these incentives.
In John Stover's book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," the author notes that between 1850 and 1871 the U.S. government offered railroads 170 million acres of land to construct 80 different projects.  
Over this time about 131 million acres were actually used, which constituted 18,738 miles of new lines. The Central Pacific scheme was made more difficult by the simple issue of keeping the enterprise properly supplied with materials.
Whereas Union Pacific could simply deliver rails, tie-plates, spikes, and other needed products right no site this wasn't possible at CP aside from wooden ties which could be hacked out of local forests.  Such things, which also included cars and locomotives, had to be transported in ocean-going vessels all of the way around South America's Cape Horn to reach California. 
According to the book, "Railroads In The Days Of Steam," the arduous journey covered roughly 15,000 miles.  This issue was resolved by Huntington; for his many faults he kept ships, sometimes dozens at a time, regularly dispatched to the west coast. 
CP's groundbreaking took place on January 8, 1863 at K Street in Sacramento along the Sacramento River waterfront.  Despite the great anticipation brought about by this event, behind the scenes a great tug-of-war ensued between Judah and the "Big Four." 
He was highly critical of their leadership and disliked everything they did, from managerial decisions to monetary expenditures.  Eventually, the "Big Four" were successful in pushing out their chief engineer (who also sat on the board).
Arquivo - 046
In a last-ditch attempt to save what he fervently believed to be "his" railroad, Judah sailed to New York City on October 3, 1863 hoping to find a financial backer who could buy out Stanford, Huntington, Leland, and Crocker. 
That person turned out to be none other than Cornelius Commodore Vanderbilt, the noted tycoon who was piecing together what later became the powerful New York Central System.  It is unclear how truly interested the Commodore ever was in Judah's undertaking but, regardless, nothing came of it. 
During his trip the engineer came down with a fever and died in New York on November 2, 1863.    Afterwards, the project continued to languish for months until, finally, the first section from the waterfront to nearby 21st Street in Sacramento was completed on October 26, 1863. 
Just a few weeks later on November 10th, CP's first locomotive, the 46-ton, 4-4-0 Governor Stanford (an 1862 product of the Norris Locomotive Works, this machine is preserved today at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento), made its first run over this trackage. 
Brian Solomon points out in his book, "Southern Pacific Railroad," the CP initially received little funding from the successful "Big Four" and by 1865 had just 35 miles opened to Auburn.  Afterwards, the pace quickened and they eventually did contribute a substantial percentage of their personal wealth to the project.
To help speed construction through the Sierras more than 14,000 Chinese immigrants were hired.  With few mechanical devices then-available all grading, tunneling, fills, bridge components, and other aspects required were built by hand. 
In July of 1867 rails reached the summit of Donner Pass but the work was slow, tedious, and extremely difficult.  This was made all the more problematic by several bad winters that decade.   The right-of-way roughly followed the North Fork of the American River as it passed through Colfax, Dutch Flat, and Emigrant Gap before reaching Summit Tunnel (tunnel #6) near present-day Norden. 
As its name implied, this bore was right at the summit of Donner Pass and the longest of the fifteen bores needed to scale the mountains (excluding snow sheds); it was 1,659 feet in length, as deep as 124 feet, and required a year to complete (August, 1867). 
It sat a 7,042 feet above sea-level and was been blasted out of the mountain using nothing more than picks, shovels, black powder, nitroglycerin, and considerable sweat and blood.  It had so delayed work that grading crews pushed ahead into Nevada months.
Arquivo - 047
Once the tunnel was finally finished, crews raced across northern Nevada, following the Humboldt River part of the way.  The project then entered Utah where a famous feat of railroading has never since been duplicated. 
As Earl Heath describes the story in an article from the January, 1943 issue of Trains Magazine entitled "Track-Laying Extravaganza," Charles Crocker bet Thomas C. Durant (Union Pacific's vice president and general manager) that his crews could lay 10 miles of track in a single day.  CP's end-of-track was then at Corinne, Utah, just 14 miles from the agreed-upon meeting point, Promontory Summit. 
The attempt was first made on April 27, 1869 but two miles into the race a locomotive derailed.  So, they tried again the next day.  A 7:15 AM the following morning crews of Irish, African-American, Chinese, Native American, Mexican, French Indiana, and other European backgrounds set out to achieve the impossible. 
Despite individual rails weighing upwards of 560 pounds the men began moving so fast they were laying down nearly one new mile every hour!  When the work concluded at 7 PM that evening they had laid 10 miles and an additional 56 feet of new railroad.  
The work was of such high quality a locomotive operated over the new track at 40 mph!  Interestingly, Mr. Ambrose's book notes that as far as anyone knows, Durant never paid the $10,000 bet.  Finally, amid a large, staged event during a major ceremony the railroads met at Promontory Summit, Utah took on May 10, 1869. 
Numerous photos were taken, many now quite famous, depicting Central Pacific 4-4-0 #60, "The Jupiter," and Union Pacific 4-4-0 #119 facing coupler-to-coupler and surrounded by large crowds.  Interestingly, Central Pacific's role in the annals of history more or less fades away following this milestone in American history.  
One of the last notable projects it completed as an independent system was reaching Oakland/San Francisco.  
As an arm of the "Big Four" the Central Pacific became part of their much larger plans and was swept up into the new Southern Pacific (via lease) on April 1, 1885.  It subsequently remained a corporate entity until June 30, 1959 when the fabled corporation was finally dissolved.  
While improvements and other upgrades to the original Donner Pass alignment have taken place over the years much of CP's original line remains in use under successor Union Pacific today.



Página 11 - https://www.american-rails.com/1877.html

Arquivo - 048
The Great Railroad Strike of 1877 was an uprising launched in response to pay cuts enacted by the country's largest railroads following the financial Panic of 1873. 
The proverbial straw that broke the camel's back was a 10% wage reduction, which had followed several others over the previous four years. 
Unfortunately, in a time when blue collar employees enjoyed virtually no job protections, these measures made it all but impossible for workers to fight back. 
Along the Baltimore & Ohio this reached a boiling point; believing they had no other recourse, workers at the railroad's shops and major division point of Martinsburg, West Virginia walked off the job on July 26, 1877.  Due to its strategic location the move paralyzed B&O's operations.  
As freight trains sat idle employees of other railroads, realizing the strike's effectiveness, joined the cause; even workers outside the industry, who had also been oppressed, walked off the job. 
While the movement lasted less than a month, and ultimately ended in failure, it sparked a revolution which brought about today's modern unions.  It also had a secondary effect of bringing about federal oversight and laws to protect employees.
Life as a railroader in the 1870's was not an easy occupation filled with many dangers, few safety measures, and long hours.  To make matters worse the financial Panic of 1873 crippled the nation and put many Americans out of work. 
According to the book, "The Great Strikes Of 1877" by David O. Stowell, there were around 30 national and international trade unions operating within the United States just prior to the panic.  At the time, the country was enjoying a great economic boom in the peacetime following the Civil War. 
This included the railroad industry which was rapidly expanding in the decade after the conflict by laying down more than 40,000 miles between 1870 and 1880 according to John Stover's book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads." 
In addition, roughly 34,000 miles were spiked down in just an 8-year period, 1865 - 1873.  By contrast, only 6,000 miles were added in the four years after the economic downturn (1873-1877). 
As railroads blossomed into America's second-largest employer (trailing only the agricultural/farming industry), much of the new trackage was built on speculation thanks to cash availability and the strong economy. 
Unfortunately, this led to a house-of-cards scenario; coupled with Congress's passage of the Coinage Act (American currency would no longer be backed with silver), the stage was set for the events of 1873.  
That year, the Northern Pacific Railway, attempting to complete the Pacific Northwest's first transcontinental railroad, was having considerable difficulty producing enough revenue to continue selling bonds. 
Arquivo - 049
These were marketed by Jay Cooke's banking firm, Jay Cooke & Company, throughout the U.S. and abroad. 
With the railroad struggling, the bank essentially wrote blank checks to further bond sales. 
When this failed a run on the bank commenced and Cooke's firm, along with the railroad, entered bankruptcy on September 18, 1873.  The event sparked one of America's worse depressions, a crisis which would endure for six years. 
As a result of the economic calamity, Mr. Stowell's book notes that the number of organized unions dropped had from 30 to 9 by the time the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 began.  In response to plummeting revenue, railroads were quick to implement wage cuts although many continued to pay dividends. 
As Philip S. Foner notes in his book, "The Great Labor Uprising Of 1877," railroads reduced workers' salary by an average of 21%-37% although food prices had declined only 5%.  The Baltimore & Ohio (B&O) was particularly egregious by slicing pay up to 50%.  
Although events along the B&O initiated the Great Railroad Strike of 1877, in essence it began slowly, taking on a life of its own over time. 
In addition, a series of events which had occurred a few years prior could be rightfully argued as its genesis; between November, 1873 and July, 1874 workers struck along eighteen different railroads in response to a series of initial wage cuts. 
In every case, the walkouts were brief, lasting for only a week or two and never drawing the nation's attention.  For railroads, the usual tactic to quell such unrest was simply firing and blacklisting any employee(s) involved.   This usually worked although the 1873/74 incidents proved a foreshadowing of things to come. 
The country's very first strike is believed to have occurred between June 20th and 30th of 1831 along the B&O.  What followed was a series of related events that never gained any effective traction in breaking the draconian rule large corporations held over their workers.
Empathy was sometimes expressed in local media outlets but no national change ever came about since big business controlled the political arena.  As a result, organized labor had little recourse in obtaining better pay, consistent hours, and job protections.
During the 1870's there were only four significant trade unions within the railroad industry; the Machinists' and Blacksmiths' International Union (MBIU), Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen (BLF), Brotherhood of Railway Conductors (BRC), and Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers (BLE). 
Only the latter, with some 10,000 members strong, held any significance but its powers were minor due to a lack of federal and state support. 
In addition, the BLE's Grand Chief Engineer at the time, Charles Wilson, balked at striking.  He also refused to stand with workers outside the union in a unified effort to bring about change. 
Arquivo - 050
Nevertheless, many, whether part of organized labor or not, felt their condition bleak by 1877.  This was particularly true along the Baltimore & Ohio where workers suffered another 10% wage cut that summer. 
Not only had many railroads implemented deep cuts but also provided employees with virtually no expense coverages. 
For instance, they were often required to stay in opulent hotels (railroad-owned) when away from home, pay for return tickets, and, of course, cover all other expenses (such as meals) while away. 
Along the B&O the latest cuts went into effect on Monday, July 16, 1877. 
In response, the fireman of locomotive #32, leading a train about to depart Camden Junction, Maryland (Baltimore), walked off the job.  His move triggered several fellow firemen to do the same. 
These spontaneous acts forced the B&O's hand which called on Baltimore's mayor, Ferdinand C. Latrope, to mobilize the police.  The show of force worked and would be used time and again to stop such uprisings along other railroads. 
Just as the B&O thought the issue was over it reignited the following day when 38 engineers joined the cause, backed by 140 workers of Baltimore's Boxmakers' And Sawyers' Union and 800 tin can makers.  The latter did so for the same reason as the railroaders, wage reductions. 
Interestingly, despite being labeled "rioters" the strikers never once stopped passenger/mail trains (a calculated decision, no doubt, which would have halted the movement of federal property [mail] and brought further problems to their cause).  Instead, they focused only on holding freight movements, the primary profit component of any railroad.
From this point tensions escalated quickly.  In Martinsburg, West Virginia, situated roughly 90 miles from Baltimore, B&O workers (most belonging to the local Trainmen's Union) went on strike during the evening of July 16th, declaring freight trains would not move until the railroad restored the 10% wage cut. 
The railroaders were only fighting for better pay, enough to feed and house their families. Unfortunately, they were painted as rioters, vagrants, and disrupters of peace.  In some newspapers they were even pegged as shadow communists, a ridiculous claim which held no merit. 
But with the political cards in their favor, the railroads enjoyed all the power.  The B&O successfully convinced West Virginia's governor, Henry M. Mathews, to call up the local militia to break the strike.  Under guard, a scab engineer (i.e., strikebreaker), began leading a freight train out of the yard on July 17th in an effort to reestablish some semblance of service. 
Determined to stop this, striker William P. Vandergriff wound up in a skirmish with militiamen.  After an exchange of gunfire he was hit three times and later died.  Still unable to resume full service, the B&O called for federal support but was initially rebuffed. 
By this time the strike was garnering national attention as more and more papers picked up the story, particularly following the Vandergriff incident.
By July 18th, with no end in sight, Governor Matthews' call for U.S. troops was answered by President Rutherford Birchard Hayes.  On the morning of July 19th Army regulars arrived in Martinsburg but were surprised to find almost nothing out of place. 
There was no property destruction or other significant disturbances ongoing.  The following day the B&O brought in fresh replacements and oversaw the arrest of many strikers which, backed by the army, essentially ended the unrest in Martinsburg. 
Arquivo - 051
The railroad's problems, though, were far from over as several other strikes had broken out across its then-2,700 mile network.  Most notable was back in Baltimore where the strikes had continued but remained largely quiet and uneventful. 
That changed on the night of July 20th when the B&O pressed the matter by breaking up the ongoing protest, calling for the arrest or firing of anyone involved.  The railroad was backed by 120 militia (later reduced to 59 when several lost interest); with this show of force an effort was made to get the trains moving. 
Perhaps not expecting such strong local support, the remaining soldiers were pelted with stones and jeers.  They responded by opening fire.  What was later dubbed the "Second Battle Of Bunker Hill," 11 people died and 40 others wounded. 
The now enraged crowd, which swelled to 15,000, forced the militiamen to barricade themselves inside Camden Station's train sheds. 
The rioters and townsfolk attempted to burn down the structure but were unsuccessful.  Over the following weekend the incident subsided, aided by 1,200-2,000 federal troops to restore peace.  
This was the last notable incident along the B&O, although strikes soon flared up elsewhere.  The Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR) of 1877, like the Baltimore & Ohio, was generally despised due to its poor working conditions and even poorer pay. 
On July 16th, the day the strikes began on the B&O, the PRR informed Western Division employees that as of July 19th all eastbound trains to Altoona would be double-headed due to the ongoing depression. 
It further stipulated that fewer crewmen would be needed, all the while refusing to install safety devices like the knuckle coupler and automatic air bake. 
By and large the PRR had received nothing more than complaints when carrying out similar actions elsewhere across its system.  In this case, however, the timing couldn't have been worse. 
With the workers aware of the Martinsburg ordeal, and already upset over their own wage cuts, two brakemen and one flagman of an eastbound freight train departing Pittsburgh on July 19th at 8:40 AM refused to go. 
This move sparked a chain reaction which shutdown PRR's Pittsburgh operations, a major terminal and division point.  With support of the local populace workers attempted arbitration, which proved unsuccessful. 
Instead, PRR officials opted to use force, convincing Pennsylvania's Adjunct General James W. Latta (Governor John F. Hartranft was away in Wyoming Territory at the time) to call up the state's Sixth Division in Pittsburgh.
Fearing the Sixth would be loyal to the strikers, it was quickly replaced by Philadelphia's First Division, soldiers who had no direct connection with the men. 
Arquivo - 052
Early on the morning of July 21st, 600 soldiers departed for the Steel City, acquiring two Gatling Guns and ammunition along the way in Harrisburg.  This set the stage for the day's later events, which eclipsed Baltimore's bloodshed. 
That afternoon the militia arrived and were greeted with a growing crowd of on-lookers, the curious, passers-by, strikers, and sympathizers (many of whom were employed in other trades). 
As the crowd became incensed, the troops were ordered to charge with fixed bayonets.  Several civilians were stabbed, which only escalated the violence.  The crowd then pelted the soldiers with stones whereupon the order was given to open fire. 
When it was over, 20 people were dead (including one woman and three children) and another 29 injured. Having incited a hornet's nest the soldiers were forced to retreat back into the local roundhouse. 
The enraged crowd then began burning railroad property and took great prejudice in destroying everything the PRR owned from the roundhouse to 23rd Street. 
In the end, the Pennsylvania Railroad lost 39 buildings, 104 locomotives, 46 passenger cars, and 1,200 freight cars suffering $4.1 million in damages (insurance would cover $3 million).  
The militiamen holed up in the roundhouse managed to save the structure, and their lives, by using a water hose.  The following morning they finally exited the building, as peace returned to the city. 
Interestingly, while more soldiers were brought in it turns out they were not needed as the citizenry by and large policed themselves. 
For the PRR, its issues were not over; in nearby Allegheny City, the railroad found itself with another mess.  Workers there had also requested arbitration and, after being denied, stopped all traffic. 
It was a devastating blow as the town was a major junction point for several PRR affiliates including the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne & Chicago (PFW&C); Allegheny Valley; and the Pittsburgh, Cincinnati & St. Louis Railway ("The Panhandle"); the B&O's Connellsville Division also reached the town. 
The strike was led by PFW&C brakeman Robert Adams Ammon; under his leadership the effort was successful in virtually shutting down PRR's long-distance freight service. 
He proved quite effective in his newfound leadership role, wielding a great deal of support from not only fellow workers but also the general public.  However, after attempting to return operations to the company on July 24th he was overruled and resigned. 
With Ammon's departure, strikes along the PRR rapidly disintegrated despite continued public support.  The workers may not have been completely aware of what they had started as the strike had now fully engaged the nation. 
Throughout Pennsylvania, both railroaders and general laborers struck in an act of unity for better pay and working conditions.
Arquivo - 053
In some cases violence broke out and people were shot although most often the protests were peaceful. While the PRR was attempting to restart regular freight service another incident occurred along the nearby Philadelphia & Reading Railroad (P&R). 
Headed by Franklin B. Gowen the P&R was a powerful corporation during the 1870's.  It moved substantial anthracite coal from mines in northeastern Pennsylvania and controlled several regional railroads. 
In Reading, P&R workers struck on July 22nd after hearing of the unrest in Pittsburgh.  Similar to the PRR and B&O, Gowen also refused arbitration.  Instead, the P&R president called for the National Guard and was provided Pennsylvania's Second Division. 
That evening, a large crowd gathered near the P&R depot at Seventh and Penn Streets to witness the strikers' continued efforts.  When troops arrived, a few men pelted them with stones and bricks.  The soldiers immediately opened fire and once it was over, some 10 bystanders were killed and another 40 wounded. 
Two days following the massacre, 1,500 workers of the Lackawanna Iron & Coal Company, along with firemen and brakemen of the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western and Delaware & Hudson railroads, went on strike in Scranton citing wage reductions; by July 29th some 35,000 regional workers were idle! 
In a last resort effort to end the stoppage, Scranton Mayor Robert H. McKune formed a hasty militia of 116 citizens referred to as the "Scranton Citizens' Corps."
Once again, shots were fired and before it was over, six miners had been killed.  Afterwards, the state sought, and received, federal support with troops arriving on July 27th. 
Following 12 days of interruptions, the PRR and Reading returned to normal operations on July 31st while service to Scranton resumed August 2nd (interestingly, the miners continued to strike until forced back to work by the presence of federal troops in mid-October).
A day after PRR's employees walked off the job in Pittsburgh the Erie Railway was faced with a similar situation at Hornellsville, New York. 
This town was the junction of its three primary main lines which included the Buffalo Division, Susquehanna Division, and Allegheny Division. 
In early June the company, which had been in bankruptcy since shortly after the 1873 panic, informed its employees a 10% pay cut would be enacted as of July 1st.  Initially, the workers did nothing. 
However, after witnessing the effectiveness of strikes along the B&O, PRR, and elsewhere they demanded their wages be restored.
Arquivo - 054
Not surprisingly, the company (led by Hugh Jewett) refused and workers struck in Hornellsville at 1 PM on July 20th.  It began a chain reaction which spread to other major Erie division points. 
Once more, the militia was called out; this time by New York's governor, Lucius Robinson.  While violence often followed such decisions this was not the case in Hornellsville where the militia did little to stop the strikes.  
Eventually, force was enacted when fresh troops of Brooklyn's 23rd Regiment broke up the walkout and the strike ended on July 26th.  Since the town was Erie's nerve center, its reopening essentially ended issues elsewhere. 
Interestingly, things were not quite over in nearby Buffalo.  This town was a major market for several railroads including the Lehigh Valley; Delaware, Lackawanna & Western; New York Central & Hudson River Railroad (NYC&HR), and others. 
Following the Erie's strike, NYC&HR workers and those on the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern (LS&MS) walked off the job after suffering their own 10% wage reduction.  In an interesting turn of events, president William H. Vanderbilt handled the issue quite differently.  In response, he largely chose ignorance and stopped all service. 
In the end, between Vanderbilt's disregard and Robinson's force, the strikers lost the fight without having won a single concession.  The NYC&HR declared it all over by July 30th, which coincided with the day LS&MS workers also gave up.  
Throughout the country there were many other strikes which never enjoyed national coverage such as in Chicago, St. Louis, Columbus, Newark (Ohio), and Indianapolis. 
All told, more than 100 people lost their lives during the bloodshed, many of whom were not even striking.  Despite being painted as villains virtually all of the walkouts had been peaceful. 
On August 5 the Great Railroad Strike Of 1877 was declared over as President Hayes noted, "The strikers have been put down by force..." 
While the Great Strike would be deemed a failure from a technical standpoint its long-term prospects were much more encouraging.  The working public quickly realized they held the power to shutdown business and the capitalistic system. 
Arquivo - 055
This led to a resurgence of organized labor, such as the Workingmen's Party Of The United States (WPUS) and Greenback-Labor Party, both of which sought to elect politicians sympathetic to their cause. 
Noteworthy issues included an 8-hour work day, a national agency monitoring the industry, minimum wages, an end to discriminatory hiring practices, eliminating company scrip as wages, and nationalizing railroads.
Not all were enacted but the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 was nevertheless a catalyst which saw many come to pass.  The Washington Capital noted the following about the strikes (reprinted in the Martinsburg Statesman on September 4, 1877):
"The late strike was not the work of a mob nor the working of a riot, but a revolution that is making itself felt throughout the land.  The afterbirth indicates the serious nature of a nativity. "
"Capitalists may stuff cotton in their ears, the subsidized press may write with apparent indifference, as boys whistle when passing a graveyard, but those who understand the forces at work in society know already that America will never be the same again.  For decades, yes centuries to come, our nation will feel the effects of the tidal wave that swept over it for two weeks in July."
In the decades following the strikes, the federal government took a much more hands-on approach in protecting the general laborer.   Not only did this lead to a rise in unions but also clamped down on corporations' brutal treatment of workers. 
On a broader scale, railroads found themselves under far greater federal scrutiny; the Interstate Commerce Commission was born on February 4, 1887 to regulate interstate commerce while a series of acts passed in the early 20th century further strengthened the ICC's power (Elkins Act of 1903, Hepburn Act of 1906, and Mann-Elkins Act of 1910). 
In addition, safety became a much more prominent issue; on March 2, 1893, Congress passed the Safety Appliance Act which went into effect in 1900. 
This mandated that all cars be equipped with George Westinghouse's automatic air brake (invented in 1869) and Eli Janney's automatic coupler (invented in 1873).  Once put into widespread practice, accidents on the jobs dramatically decreased.  



Página 12 - https://www.american-rails.com/first-aid-kit.html

Arquivo - 056
While it may seem hard to comprehend, the common First Aid Kit we take for granted in this modern-day age of advanced medicine and technology surprisingly can trace its roots to the railroad industry.
The founder of the Johnson & Johnson Company worked with the Denver & Rio Grande to establish a new product that would greatly improve the health of workers constructing the railroad through the backcountry of Colorado.
As it turns out the idea proved so successful that it led to an entire line of kits being sold by Johnson, not only used by railroads but also across other industries and the general public, as well.
Throughout the early 20th century the First Aid Kit was the common method of treating less-severe injuries and led to the development of the classic Band-Aid brand of adhesive bandages.  
It's always interesting how fate and timing can lead to new discovers and important products.
Take, for example, the First Aid Kit. During the late 1880s Johnson & Johnson founder Robert Wood Johnson was headed west through the Rocky Mountains of Colorado to enjoy a relaxing vacation at a cattle ranch.
To get there he took the then-Denver & Rio Grande Railway (D&RG), which was in the midst of major construction. The railroad had been established in only 1870 and its original owners envisioned a system that would connect Mexico with Denver.
However, funding never materialized and new ownership under the notorious tycoon Jay Gould saw its future change. 
Gould's plan was to see the D&RG build west across the Rockies and reach the growing urban center of Salt Lake City (the system eventually grew into the Denver & Rio Grand Western that operated across Utah, Colorado, and northern New Mexico).
During Johnson's trip over the railroad he met one of the company's surgeons, which were typically general practitioners with some surgical experience.
As the two began talking they realized that each could help the other; the surgeon needed quality, sterile equipment in which to have available for patients (a difficult proposition when most railroad construction was miles from the nearest hospital and injuries are frequent and sometimes severe) while Johnson came to understand that he had a great opportunity to develop a new product that would fill a great need. 
After the two spoke at length Johnson drafted several letters during the spring of 1888, sending them to railroad surgeons all over the country inquiring as to what kind of medical supplies they would need in the field, if available at a moment's notice.
Part of Johnson's letter read: "We are about to get up a railway emergency case, and wish to make one that will be of real service in the field it is intended for…
Arquivo - 057
it is our wish to get suggestions from practical railroad surgeons. We already have them from one of two of the surgeons of the largest western railroads." 
After gathering this data Johnson & Johnson began offering what was known as the "Railway Station And Factory Supply Case" in 1890, a type of First Aid Kit placed in heavy duty metal boxes that was meant for use by station agents and factory workers.
An advertisement for the product described what it was used for (proclaiming that it could not only treat minor injuries but also "a number of serious accidents") and the supplies it held, which included everything from cotton swabs and bandages to mercury tablets and rubber adhesive plaster.
The success of the case led to Johnson & Johnson greatly expanding its line. In 1898 the company released the First Aid Packet for soldiers fighting in the Spanish American War. 
A few years later in 1901 the company began publishing First Aid Manuals, which were included within the kits offering detailed information on how someone could properly treat a long list of different injuries while the waited for doctors to arrive.
When introducing the manual the company had this to say about it:
"To all who are interested in first aid work we recommend Johnson & Johnson's First Aid Manual, a volume handsomely bound in blue cloth and decorated in red and gold.
It contains one hundred and twenty pages and over one hundred illustrations, some in two colors, describing almost every imaginable accident that can occur, and advising best treatment, with especial warning of what not to attempt. 
This valuable work is edited by Fred B. Kilmer, Ph. C., and is contributed to by eminent surgeons who have had long experience in railroad, mining, factory, police and ambulance service, both in this country and abroad."
By the late 19th century Johnson & Johnson was becoming a major supplier of medical kits for an increasing number of railroads (many of which had their company names/logos placed on the exterior of the metal kits).
In 1897 it had its own exhibit at the National Association of Railway Surgeons' annual convention in Chicago and by the early 20th century First Aid Kits could be found not only in the railroad industry but also early automobiles (the Autokit) and airplanes (the Aerokit).
As the years passed the kit became more diversified, advanced, and easier to use particularly for the general public (such as the introduction of Band-Aid brand adhesive bandages in 1920).
It is rather amazing that an everyday product many of us now take for granted has a history that began in the railroad industry (and can still be found as common items located within locomotives, company vehicles, terminals, and virtually any place else workers are out in the field).
The blog post link referenced at the top of this page was written by Johnson & Johnson's Chief Historian, Ms. Margaret Gurowitz, and is a fabulous documentary on how the kits came to be and their development over the years. 



Página 13 - https://www.american-rails.com/1880s.html

Arquivo - 058
With the Transcontinental Railroad's completion, ever greater numbers of Americans headed west for new opportunities and a fresh start. 
Most new rail construction through the mid-1870's had been concentrated predominantly east of the Mississippi River. 
However, as folks headed west, the iron horse followed.  The building boom peaked during the 1880's, during the height of the Gilded Age. 
As historian John F. Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," a staggering 70,400 miles was laid down between 1880 and 1890 with total mileage growing from 93,200 to 163,600! 
The West, alone, witnessed a staggering 129% increase.  The decade also witnessed many improvements in passenger comfort and greater operational efficiencies.
The information here provides a brief history of the industry during the 1880's.
The Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe reached California in 1883 when its leader, William Barstow Strong, successfully broke Southern Pacific's monopoly within the Golden State
The Erie Railroad (then known as the New York, Lake Erie & Western) pulled off an incredible feat by reaching Chicago through acquisition of the Chicago & Atlantic Railway in 1883.
After years of delays and financial troubles the Northern Pacific Railway opened the first transcontinental route into the Pacific Northwest in 1883 (initially via the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company, it would not gain a direct route to Puget Sound until 1888).
In late 1882 components of what later became the modern Denver & Rio Grande Western (the Denver & Rio Grande and original Denver & Rio Grande Western) opened a corridor through the heart of the Rocky Mountains between Denver and Salt Lake City.
Finally, the Southern Pacific arrived at El Paso, Texas in 1881 and shortly thereafter (via several subsidiaries which later became its Texas & New Orleans) opened a through route to New Orleans, Louisiana (the fabled "Sunset Route").
These are only a fraction of the decade's major accomplishments but highlight just how much construction was ongoing at the time. 
As Dr. George Hilton notes in his book, "American Narrow Gauge Railroads," the railroad industry was nearing its "economic maturation" by the 1870's, a process virtually completed by the 1880's.
Arquivo - 059
No other transportation mode could haul passengers and freight at such unparalleled speeds and in virtually any type of weather. As mentioned, railroads witnessed their greatest growth in mileage that decade by constructing more than 7,000 each year. 
By 1890, the nation boasted a total of 163,597 miles.  So much construction can be partially attributed to the strong economic times in which no financial panic occurred. 
It could also be rightfully argued a great deal of overbuilding occurred as magnates like Jay Gould attempted to outmaneuver rival lines. 
Kansas was a prime example.  In 1890 it held the second greatest mileage by state, behind only Illinois, and would peak at 9,388 in 1920. 
Although significant agricultural traffic partially explains the blanket of rails, corridors were sometimes built only yards or feet apart. 
In the post World War II period, the economy could no longer support so many duplicate routes and there eventually abandoned (surprisingly, most remained in service until the 1970's). 
Today, Kansas maintains less than 50% of its all-time high.  A similar situation occurred in Iowa where it has lost more than 60% of its mileage (from 9,808 miles to less than 3,900 today). 
Perhaps the 1880s' greatest achievement was the adoption of a standard gauge; 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches.  Railroads finally realized the only way to provide highly efficient service, and reap the greatest profits, was via a uniform gauge.
Differing gauges had persisted for decades.  For instance, the Erie Railroad had long used a 6 foot gauge; the Pennsylvania Railroad 4 feet, 9 inches; and many railroad across the South went with a gauge of 5 feet.  By 1890 virtually all of the country's major railroads operated with standard gauge. 
It is somewhat surprising then that another gauge gained widespread support as the industry was adopting 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches.  In the 1870's a narrow-gauge of 3 feet was argued by some as the ideal rail width for its lower operational and construction costs. 
By the mid-1880s there was over 11,500 miles of narrow-gauge railroads.  While much of this was used in branch line or industrial/short line operations, such as by logging companies, there was a growing contingent of common-carriers being built to 3-foot across the country, so much so that promoters nearly completed a transcontinental system. 
The most famous narrow-gauge operations included the Denver & Rio Grande Railway; Denver, South Park & Pacific; Colorado & Southern; Toledo, Cincinnati & St. Louis; and Texas & St. Louis. 
Widespread use of narrow-gauge systems was short-lived, however. According to Mr. Hilton's book it peaked in the 1880's (its peak year was 1886, showing 11,699 miles in service) before promoters sullenly realized that inefficient interchange, along with poor construction standards, made 3 foot railroads highly profitable.   
Arquivo - 060
Before 1920 less than half of the peak mileage remained, just 4,500; by the 1950 only 914 miles remained in use.  Surprisingly, the D&RGW's San Juan Mining District survived until 1967 and another branch was not abandoned until 1980. 
For the general public, rail gauge and the arguments thereof matter little; they were most concerned with improved comforts. By the 1880's services had improved drastically; virtually all of the modern-day conveniences were either in use or nearly so. 
These included sleeping accommodations (provided by companies such as Pullman, Wagner, Woodruff, Flowers, and Monarch), lounges, parlors, and diners.  The dome car would appear some decades later during the streamliner revolution. 
Another important development was central steam heating, which did away with the dangerous use of wood or coal-fired stoves.  These efficient method of keeping cars warm can be traced as far back as 1843 according to John H. White, Jr's book, "The American Railroad Passenger Car: Part 2."
Its first successful application, however, occurred in 1881 when a design conceived by James Emerson tested on several New England railroads that year. 
He first attempted to use a boiler in the baggage car but this proved too dangerous when it nearly overheated. 
He later conceived using the locomotive's own steam, with separate heaters under each car.  It was a novel concept but a great deal more testing was be needed before it found use. 
Other names important to its development included Lieutenant James W. Graydon, D.D. and J.H. Sewall, William Martin, and Edward E. Gold, all of whom continued to refine the concept. 
Another important development was the "flameless," electric light.  It first tested in 1881, a time which railroads were rapidly attempting to improve interior lighting due to public complaints. 
Of course, the first cars to receive electric lighting were of the first class variety; Pullman and Wagner both had them featured on some of their equipment by 1886-1887.
Arquivo - 061
One of the most important safety features  came into use during 1887, the open-ended vestibule car, allowing guests to safely pass between cars.  The need for vestibules became increasingly important with the introduction of services like parlors, diners, and chair cars. 
According to his book, "The Railroad Passenger Car," author August Mencken notes it was the work of Henry Howard Sessions, the superintendent at Pullman, who conceived the vertical end frame, or friction plate, in 1887. 
It had two primary purposes; to act as a cushion between cars and, more importantly, reduce the car's motion at each end.  Another major event that into affect during the 1880s was the adoption of Standard Time zones.
The work is originally credited to Charles Ferdinand Dowd who was the first to propose a standard time within a pamphlet he published in 1870 entitled, "A System of National Time for the Railroads." 
This piece became the basis for the industry's standard time.  Dowd was an 1853 graduate of Yale University (boasting a doctorate) who believed the country should be divided into four sections. 
These segments would cover 15 degrees of longitude, or an hour of real time.  As the years passed the idea slowly gained traction although more than a decade would pass before it found widespread use. 
Since the time could be different depending on where one was, along with the fact that it was earlier in the day the further west one was a plan was set in motion in the early 1870s to create a more unified timing system.
Originally known as the Time Table Convention, later as the General Time Convention. William Allen was secretary of the convention in 1876 and would be the one credited with planning the four major time zones now common in the country: Eastern, Central, Mountain and Pacific.
These zones lie along the 75th (Eastern), 90th (Central), 105th (Mountain) and 120th (Pacific) meridians. Railroads liked the new proposal and accepted it in 1883 with the new time going into affect on November 18th of that year.   Rail construction in the 1880's slowed the following decade, largely due to the 1893's financial panic. 
However, growth still ensued, particularly in the Midwest were the famed granger roads had taken root to serve America's Breadbasket.  In 1887 the Interstate Commerce Commission was established, the first public agency put in place to monitor railroads. 
The ICC's creation vastly improved safety standards, such as equipping knuckle couplers and automatic air brakes on all equipment.  By the early 20th century, federal oversight was firmly established.




Página 14 - https://www.american-rails.com/1880s.html

Arquivo - 062
A multitude of events were affecting the railroad industry during the 1890's:
A financial panic ensued in 1893, the first federal regulations were enacted that decade.
A new mode of transportation took root (interurbans).
Labor made a greater push for fair working conditions.
A locomotive reached speeds beyond 100 mph (New York Central & Hudson River 4-4-0 #999, which attained a speed of 112.5 miles per hour on May 9, 1893)
The mighty Southern Railway was born.
In general, though, in what is regarded as the Second Industrial Revolution was great time in America; business was rapidly expanding (especially in the west) and new construction continued with nearly 30,000 miles completed between 1890 and 1900.
Much of this trackage was laid down across the Midwest and western states, particularly through Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin and eastern Nebraska and Kansas; the so-called "granger railroads." 
Alas, the building blitzkrieg resulted in a great deal of redundant trackage throughout America's Breadbasket.  
As federal regulations tightened, railroads were forced to continue operating many of these branches at a loss until the 1970's and 1980's. 
Dr. George W. Hilton points out railroads had reached their economic maturation by the late 19th century and would remain the only viable and efficient mode of transportation until the 1920's.  
They dominated every aspect of American commerce.  The information here highlights the industry during the 19th century's final decade.
As the 1890's dawned, railroads were riding a great wave of euphoria. 
The industry had witnessed more than 70,000 miles of new construction in the 1880's, trains were the undisputed leader in transportation (which drove an economic explosion), rail barons became increasingly richer, and it appeared nothing would slow America's largest industry. 
As their power grew into what Dr. Hilton described as a cartel, railroads used their influence to place supportive politicians throughout Washington and at the state level.  As a result, complaints by the general public were largely ignored. 
That began to change following the Great Railroad Strike Of 1877.  While it did not win concessions for the common worker, Americans recognized the corporate machine could potentially be taken down.  Continued efforts eventually led to the Interstate Commerce Commission's formation on February 4, 1887. 
In his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," author John F. Stover points out that Richard S. Olney, a corporate attorney, noted the new ICC only "...satisfied the popular clamour for a government supervision of the railroads," but would do nothing in actually dampening their power. 
At first, Olney's words rang true but over time they were proven wrong as further acts ended railroads' free reign.
The decade's most important legislation was in the area of safety. 
As Jim Boyd notes in his book, "The American Freight Train," the Railway Safety Appliance Act of 1893, passed by Congress that year, federally mandated all rail equipment include two important devices, George Westinghouse's automatic air brake and Eli Janney's automatic knuckle coupler (also known as the Master Car Builders, or MCB, coupler).
Both were revolutionary as the most practical and efficient way to stop a train and join/detach equipment. 
The former had been tested as early as 1869 and the latter in 1873 but railroads continually refused to use either citing cost concerns.  The decade's only significant downturn was the financial Panic of 1893. 
There were many reasons for this particular depression, some of which were international in nature.  For the railroad industry, it all began when the Philadelphia & Reading Railroad, a mighty northeastern anthracite carrier which had been attempting to create a regional monopoly, entered receivership on February 20, 1893. 
Arquivo - 063
This sparked a domino effect that witnessed 40,000 miles of railroad in bankruptcy that year including the Erie Railway, Baltimore & Ohio, Northern Pacific, Richmond & Danville, Santa Fe, and Union Pacific.  While recovery took time the panic was not nearly as severe as the 1873 incident.
Strikes At The Pullman Palace Car Company
The strikes at George Pullman's Pullman Palace Car Company in May, 1894 were not directly related to the railroad industry but would eventually involve railroaders.  It also signified another shift towards organized labor gaining concessions against the corporate empire. 
If you have any interest in this subject, its history, and effects on American society you should consider a copy of Jack Kelly’s book, “The Edge Of Anarchy.”
It covers these subjects and specifically details the great uprising which began when workers at the Pullman Palace Car Company walked off the job in a fight for higher wages.
The battle soon escalated into a nationwide strike involving American Railway Union’s 150,000 members, led by Eugene V. Debs. Mr. Kelly’s book eloquently details the struggle, which ultimately ended in failure when the U.S. government dispatched federal troops to quell the unrest.
While “The Edge Of Anarchy” is a fascinating look at a different time in America it also highlights similarities to labor issues in modern times.  Without this fight, the industry's modern labor movement in the 20th century would likely never have been successful.
A significant positive event did result from the depression, creation of the Southern Railway. 
After the Richmond & Danville's struggles, the Southern was born in 1894 through the efforts of banking mogul J.P. Morgan; it was comprised of the original R&D along with several smaller systems that, combined, formed a 6,000 mile system. 
Morgan used his extensive assets to spent heavily on upgrading the new conglomerate.  After the initial merger the Southern continued to grow, peaking at nearly 6,500 miles by 1900. 
During the 20th century it became one of the most profitable railroads of all time before its merger with the Norfolk & Western in 1982 (forming today's Norfolk Southern Railway).
In its final incarnation the railroad stretched from Richmond to Jacksonville, Memphis to New Orleans, Washington to Atlanta, St. Louis to Chattanooga, and was comprised of some 125 smaller railroads. Its most important main line linked Atlanta with Washington, D.C. and was entirely double-tracked. 
Two other systems that helped rebuild the South were the Atlantic Coast Line and Seaboard Air Line.  The former, also known as the ACL or 'Coast Line,' served points from Richmond to Florida and west to Birmingham, Alabama. 
The Seaboard Air Line is perhaps best remembered as a smaller version of the ACL; both railroads served many of the same cities.  The long-time competitors would eventually merge in 1967 forming the Seaboard Coast Line. 
The industry in the 1890's saw two major improvements. Firstly, railroads began switching to steel rails in favor of iron. 
Arquivo - 064
Steel, created from molten pig iron (before the development of the open hearth furnace), was not only much stronger but also had a longer lifespan.  The modern steel movement is credited to Englishmen Henry Bessemer, who invented the so-called "Bessemer Process" in 1857. 
It was the first of its kind enabling steel to be produced cheaply on a large scale.  A license for his process was acquired by Alexander Lyman Holley, an American mechanical engineer, which brought steel-making to the United States in 1863. He, along with John F. Winslow and John Augustus Griswold, placed the first steel mill into operation at Troy, New York in 1865. 
Afterwards, the use of steel rail rose sharply; in 1880 about 25% of America's rail network consisted of steel rails.  This number had jumped to 80% by 1890, and by 1900 nearly all corridors were laid with steel.
The decade's other advancement was the electric locomotive's introduction, first employed by the B&O.  The Baltimore Belt Railroad and Howard Street Tunnel project essentially kicked off main line electrification in the United States. 
Its origins can be traced as far back as the 1830's although modern electrified operations began with Frank Sprague's successful demonstrations on the Richmond Union Passenger Railway in 1888.
The Baltimore Belt Railroad, was built to close a gap between the railroad’s New York-Washington (north-south) and Washington-Cumberland (east-west) main lines.  To learn more about the B&O's electrified operations, please click here. 
Prior to this the railroad relied on a circuitous car ferry operation across Baltimore Harbor, making competition against nearby rival Pennsylvania Railroad nearly impossible. 
As Dr. George Hilton and John Due's authoritative piece, "The Electric Interurban Railways In America," points out the birth of the true American interurban began around the same time, in 1886, when the same Frank Sprague was involved with another, the New York Elevated Railway.   
There, he developed an electric motorcar whereby the traction motor was situated between the axle, along with a trolley pole and multiple-unit control stand.  
This gave way to the typical streetcar which became such a common sight throughout America.
There were three great periods of interurban development; the first occurred during the 1890's and reached a great flurry of construction between 1901 and 1904 when more than 5,000 miles were laid down.  
The Panic of 1903 ended this fervor but it reignited again between 1905 and 1908 when another 4,000 miles were built.  There was one casualty of the 1890's, the narrow gauge railroad. 
In another book by Dr. Hilton entitled, "American Narrow Gauge Railroads," he details this unique movement, which sprang up during the 1870's. 
It reached its zenith in 1885 when 11,699 miles were placed into operation.  Proponents felt it a more efficient alternative to the standard gauge of 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches.  However, their data was later proven flawed and by 1890, mileage had tumbled to 8,757 as lines were either abandoned or converted. 
By 1900 this number had decreased to just 6,733.  In 1900 the country's total rail mileage had increased from 163,597 (1890) to 193,346.
By this time the railroad industry was so well entrenched that it seemed rails reached every small community of the country, particularly in the Midwest and Northeast.
The era would see several east-west and north-south main lines in operation including no less than five routes connecting the west coast. Revenues by this time had topped $1 billion with three quarters of a million workers employed on the railroad. By the 20th century this number continued to increase.






Página 15 - https://www.american-rails.com/1900s.html

Arquivo - 065
By 1900, the country's total rail mileage had increased to 193,346, from 163,597 in 1890.  It would continue to grow for another decade before reaching its all-time high during the World War I era. 
At the 20th century's dawn, railroads had reached their economic supremacy; it seemed rails poked into the tiniest of hamlets and trains dominated American commerce in every possible way.  
This resulted in a minority group of very rich and influential individuals; names like Cornelius Vanderbilt (and his heirs), Edward Harriman, Jay Gould, James Hill, and Collis P. Huntington. 
By the late 19th century the federal government had grown weary of their power and sought to reel in the industry.  That effort began in 1887 with the Interstate Commerce Commission's creation, tasked with regulating the railroads. 
It continued with 1893's Railway Safety Appliance Act, forcing railroads to install the automatic air brake and knuckle coupler on all equipment.  Between 1900 and 1910 a series of additional acts were passed to further tighten the government's grip. 
From a statistical standpoint, the new century's first twenty years were the industry's zenith in terms of size and scope; after 1920 traffic and corridors were slowly lost to other transportation modes (accelerated by the depression). 
While the national rail network did not reach its all-time peak until 1916, the industry's power was largely capped during the 20th century's first decade. 
As historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," President Theodore Roosevelt (sworn in on September 14, 1901 following President William McKinley's assassination by Leon Czolgosz) was no fan of their intimidation and dominance.  Wishing to change this, he oversaw sweeping legislation during his administration. 
In retrospect, perhaps his efforts were too sweeping although they did prove effective. There were two noteworthy bills passed into law at this time, the Elkins Act of 1903 and Hepburn Act of 1906; both brought increased regulation and significantly broadened the Interstate Commerce Commission's (ICC) power. 
The former ended the use of rebates in an effort to protect competition and fair pricing.  The latter amended its predecessor by providing the ICC broad powers in controlling freight rates.  Essentially, railroads were banned from adjusting rates without prior approval.
In 1910, new president William Howard Taft expanded upon Roosevelt's efforts.  He held an even worse view of railroads, overseeing passage of the Mann-Elkins Act.  This legislation further increased the ICC's power, requiring railroads to show just cause for any rate hike. 
Unfortunately, such draconian measures were not lifted until 1980 (Staggers Act), by which time many companies had either declared bankruptcy or were in the process of doing so.  (A strong argument could be made against these policies, which ultimately led to the industry's downfall by the 1970's and abandonment of so much infrastructure.) 
Perhaps the decade's greatest improvement was the transformation from iron to steel rails. Steel's durability and strength could simply not be matched; the nation's first mill appeared in the 1860's and steel became so widespread by 1900 that virtually all lines boasted such.   
Arquivo - 066
The record mileage achieved in 1916 (254,037 miles) could rightfully be argued as the industry's apex in many other ways.  For instance, additional regulations and other transportation modes would increasingly curtail its market power beyond the 1920's.
The interurban story has been well documented and more information regarding this fascinating aspect of American transportation can be found here. 
For a complete history I would strongly recommend a copy of Dr. George Hilton and John Due's authoritative piece, "The Electric Interurban Railways In America," which thoroughly covers the subject. 
The interurbans sprang up in the very late 19th century as an early form of rapid transit utilizing electrification. 
Many saw it as the future in short and intermediate commuter service due to its cleanliness and high speed capabilities.   
There were three great periods of interurban development; the first occurred during the 1890's and then reached a great flurry of construction between 1901 and 1904 when more than 5,000 miles were built. 
The Panic of 1903 temporarily slowed construction but it reignited during a brief four-year period from 1905 to 1908 when another 4,000 miles were placed into service.  Another financial setback in 1907 all but ended further investment except in isolated pockets. 
In 1889 there were just 7 miles of interurbans in use, a number which jumped to 3,122 by 1901, and finally peaked at 15,580 in 1916.
As Dr.'s Due and Hilton point out, "...by 1912 the American interurban network on the whole had taken its final shape.  A marked decline set in about 1918, and in the decade 1928-1937 the industry was virtually annihilated.  By 1960, no trace of it remained in its original form." 
It's immediate downfall began with the early automobile's success (notably Henry Ford's Model T), which were affordable for everyday Americans despite poor road conditions, and the Great Depression which began with 1929's stock market crash.  In truth, interurbans should have never been built. 
The systems were designed to link nearby cities and act as high speed, commuter operations that would compete against traditional steam railroads.  Unfortunately, many were never engineered properly for such speeds, featuring steep grades and sharp curves. 
Most were further handicapped by choosing rights-of-way along public roads and through city streets in an effort to reduce construction costs. 
In a market where profits were slim, only those built to better standards with an eye towards freight lasted beyond World War II.  Even famous systems like the Pacific Electric Railway and Chicago, Aurora & Elgin barely survived into the 1950's. 
Arquivo - 067
Those which remained after 1960, like the Illinois Terminal, did so as freight carriers, having shed virtually all of their interurban heritage.
The United States' entry into World War I (April 6, 1917) also proved incredibly problematic; most railroads were completely unprepared for the tsunami of traffic that followed. 
Not only did freight yards jam and trains snarl to a crawl but many carriers also lacked sufficient equipment to deal with the deluge. 
In an effort to maintain fluid traffic, the federal government took the unprecedented step of nationalizing the industry on December 28, 1917 via the United States Railroad Administration (USRA). While railroads were paid rental fees, the USRA was nevertheless very hard on their property. 
Interested only in maintaining orderly and methodical operations, corridors were strained under the relentless traffic and deferred maintenance.  In addition, passenger trains deemed unnecessary were eliminated, shops and terminals were centralized, and profits generally ignored. 
On March 1, 1920 the network returned to private ownership.  Unfortunately, companies were forced to spend heavily in repairing the damage.  The industry worked hard to prevent a future USRA takeover and was well-prepared when the country entered World War II in 1941. 
Despite the heavy-handed measures, some positives did come from USRA control, such as standardized locomotives (Notably the 4-8-2 "Light Mountain," 2-8-2 "Light Mikado," and 4-6-2 "Pacific."  This practice became common during the diesel era.) and rolling stock.  
After 1920, many things changed; coupled with increased regulation, new competition (automobiles and the airplane) eroded railroads' dominance.  The Ford Model-T, at less than $300, proved an affordable option for many Americans. 
In spite of poor road conditions, millions were sold through the 1920's while the U.S. witnessed its first commercial flight by Elliot Air Service via a Curtiss JN 4 aircraft in 1915. 
The so-called "Roarin' Twenties" were a great economic boon where the nation's wealth doubled between 1920-1929 and the country became a consumer society that continues through today. 
Unfortunately, the quick spike in wealth led to financial collapse following the stock market crash of October 28, 1929. 
The ensuing depression was as difficult on railroads as every day Americans; many either fell into receivership or were outright purchased by stronger carriers.  It also effectively wiped out the interurban industry. 
In an effort to combat these effects and regain market share Union Pacific, Pullman, and the Winton Engine Company teamed up to unveil a radical new concept, the streamliner, in 1934. 
Arquivo - 068
The train was colorful, fast, and comfortable, a profound departure from what the public had always known.  Shortly thereafter, the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy and Budd Company showcased a similar train shrouded in stainless steel.  
Sleek, fast, and ultra-modern, the Pioneer Zephyr broke the speed record between Denver and Chicago, covering the 1,000+ miles, non-stop, in only 13 hours, 5 minutes. This train and the M-10000 paved the way for a future generation of rail travel. 
No longer would trains be drab and colorless; through the World War II era, and beyond, most railroads featured services with some type of streamlining concept incorporated. 
The early 20th century is generally regarded as railroads' "Golden Age" with several famous trains, stations/terminals, and other noteworthy landmark feats dotting the American landscape. 
It was certainly a different era in America when nearly everyone was exposed to railroads in some manner (not so today).  By 1900, rail equipment was quite specialized with comfort and luxury commonplace.   In addition, iron, and then steel, replaced wood as the primary component with which cars were built.  
In his excellent book, "The Railroad Passenger Car," author August Mencken notes as far back as 1846 H.L. Lewis proposed building cars of iron, claiming they would be of lighter weight and greater strength. 
The first car constructed entirely of iron was the so-called "LaMothe Car," patented by Dr. B.J. LaMothe in 1854. 
The initial example, at 46-feet in length, debuted in 1859 and tested on several railroads the following year.  As the 19th century progressed, iron transitioned to steel and by the early 1900's many railroads were operating cars built partially or entirely of metal. 
This led to the so-called "heavyweight" designs (the name derived from the considerable weight) which found widespread use until lightweight alloys (like aluminum) grew in popularity during the 1930's. 
George Pullman and his Pullman Palace Car Company (later reorganized as the Pullman Car Company) began building cars in 1867 and was the premier manufacturer by 1900, having acquired all other competitors by then; nearly every top train carried at least some Pullman equipment. 
The company's plant was located in Pullman, Illinois and its cars were unmatched in comfort and style.  If you traveled by rail prior to the 1960's, Pullman was the name you trusted. 
While most famous for sleepers, it built other types such as parlors, diners, and domes.  It also manufactured freight cars and even self-propelled rail cars ("Doodlebugs").
Arquivo - 069
From a historical standpoint, many of the best-remember trains appeared during the early 20th century such as:
Pennsylvania's Broadway Limited appeared in 1912
New York Central's 20th Century Limited appeared in 1902
Santa Fe’s Chief and Super Chief appeared in 1926 and 1936, Baltimore & Ohio’s Capitol Limited appeared in 1923
The jointly operated California Zephyr (Chicago, Burlington & Quincy; Denver & Rio Grande Zephyr; and Western Pacific) of 1949
Milwaukee Road’s legendary Hiawathas inaugurated in 1935
Great Northern’s venerable Empire Builder appeared in 1929
Southern Pacific’s Daylights launched in 1922
Southern Railway’s Crescent Limited  appeared in 1922
The nation's largest and most renowned passenger stations also appeared during the industry's "Golden Age."
Pennsylvania Station appeared in 1910
New York Central’s Grand Central Terminal opened in 1913, replacing Grand Central Station
Delaware, Lackawanna & Western's Hoboken Terminal appeared in 1907
The jointly built and operated [Union Pacific, Santa Fe, and Southern Pacific] Los Angeles Union Passenger Terminal (today's Los Angeles Union Station)
Chicago Union Station appeared in 1925
Denver Union Station appeared in 1914. 
Sadly, many, like Pennsylvania Station, have since been partially or entirely razed. 
The period through World War I also signaled railroading's peak dominance in transportation; during this time they hauled an astonishing 98% of intercity passenger traffic and 77% of intercity freight traffic. 
However, following the Second World War passenger traffic declined significantly and would not recover, even as railroads spent heavily on new equipment through the 1950's.
In the 1960s, many were trying desperately to end or curtail services.  Coupled with the stifling regulation, Congress finally relented and created the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) in 1971, thus enabling most railroads to exit the passenger business.





Página 16 - https://www.american-rails.com/1910s.html

Arquivo - 070
American railroads reached their zenith during the 1910-1920 period.  The industry's dominance, which had been nearly impenetrable only a few decades prior, was finally capped. 
Between government regulation and new transportation modes, railroads slowly lost market share after 1920 (accelerated by 1929's stock market crash). 
The decade's most notable event, of course, was the U.S. involvement in World War I.  A series of events, largely due to an inability of meeting traffic demands, led to federal control. 
Railroads were placed under the United States Railroad Administration's (USRA) direction in late 1917, where they remained for the next three years.  
While successful in keeping trains running, the USRA was heavily criticized for its oppressive measures of pushing the nation's infrastructure to the brink. 
In the aftermath, most companies were forced to spend heavily on repairs and worn out equipment.  They vowed to avoid a future takeover.  For its many flaws, the USRA did bring several positive changes, such as standardized practices.  
Railroads in the post-1910 era found themselves in a changing America, one involving increased federal regulation and greater competition.  It began in 1910 when new president William Howard Taft expanded upon President Theodore Roosevelt's efforts to curb the industry's leverage. 
While Roosevelt only wished to keep railroads in check, Taft had no love for them and oversaw passage of the Mann-Elkins Act.  This legislation further increased the Interstate Commerce Commission's authority, requiring railroads to show just cause for any rate hike. 
The industry incurred further setbacks that decade as influential moguls passed away; stalwarts such as Edward Harriman (1919), J.P. Morgan (1913), and James J. Hill (1916) were all lost at this time. 
In addition, Collis P. Huntington had died some years earlier in 1900.  The industry was now led by second and third-generation descendants who held fewer political powers. 
Despite an increasingly hostile Washington, D.C., historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," national mileage continued to grow and reached its all-time peak of 254,037 in 1916. 
That year also witnessed the first decline in mileage when 400 miles were abandoned, a trend which continues through the 21st century.
In his book, "America's Fighting Railroads: A World War II Pictorial History," author Don DeNevi points out that additional rail mileage was laid down between 1910 and 1920. 
Arquivo - 071
It peaked in 1910 when 4,122 miles were built and slowly declined from that point forward (particularly after 1913). Overall, the decade (1910-1919) witnessed 19,205 new miles constructed.  It was the last great period of railroad development; the following decade (1920-1929) saw barely 6,000 miles built. 
The interurbans also reached their pinnacle at this time with mileage peaking at 15,580 in 1916.  These electrified rapid transit systems were once viewed as the future in fast, reliable, and clean transportation between intermediate points. 
They had evolved out of the local streetcar movement but unfortunately, most were built to very low standards, inhibiting their ability to effectively compete against traditional steam railroads. 
The industry rapidly took off during the 1890's and between 1901-1908 witnessed more than 1,000 new miles nearly every year.  In their book, "The Electric Interurban Railways In America," Dr.'s George Hilton and John Due note the industry achieved maturity in 1912 and rapidly declined after 1918. 
The early automobile proved particularly harmful and the Great Depression all but destroyed what remained.  By World War II  the original network was barely recognizable and those which did survive dropped most of their interurban heritage for typical freight railroads.
With the success of Henry Ford's Model T, which debuted on October 1, 1908, a radical shift occurred in America, one where the automobile was viewed as the future in ground transportation.
Although it took several more decades, by the post-World War II period, concrete replaced steel rails as the primary method of travel. 
On July 11, 1916 the Federal Aid Road Act (or Bankhead–Shackleford Act) was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson, which provided $75 million of federal money in a 50-50 match with individual states to improve roadways.  In 1917 there were already nearly 5 million motorized vehicles in use, a number which rapidly increased over the following decade. 
As this was unfolding, World War I broke out in Europe during mid-summer, 1914, a conflict which the United States entered on April 6, 1917.  Railroads had witnessed traffic increases since hostilities began as the U.S. sent transatlantic supplies to its allies. 
While the industry was ill-prepared to handle this spike in business it was also hampered by other issues, such as rising operating expenses as costs outpaced general inflation.  With the ICC now controlling the market, it denied their request to increase freight rates.  As a result, they remained flat at just 73 cents/ton-mile.  
While the agency did allow a small 5% increase it proved largely ineffective.  Mr. Stover's book points out that by 1915 over 40,000 miles of railroads were in default or receivership.   Then, the industry suffered a car shortage. 
The issue had been building for months as the government stipulated high-priority shipments deemed essential to the war effort take precedence over general movements. 
Since most traffic was moving from west to east, terminals and yards were slammed with cars up and down the east coast.  This issue caused the shortage to grow to 158,000 cars by November, 1917. 
Arquivo - 072
In an attempt to untangle the growing mess, President Wilson established the United States Railroad Administration (USRA) on December 28, 1917. 
The new agency was led by William G. McAdoo, Secretary of the Treasury, who also had experience in the industry.  As Jim Boyd points out in his book, "The American Freight Train," the move technically did not nationalize the industry although it did provide the USRA broad powers. 
Instead, each railroad was rented and provided fair compensation for its cooperation (with little choice, it can be argued nationalization did occur indirectly).  Essentially, competition ended and the entire 254,000+ network operated as a single entity.  
Interested only in maintaining orderly operations, corridors were strained under the relentless traffic, resulting in deferred maintenance.  In addition, passenger trains deemed unnecessary were eliminated, shops and terminals centralized, and profits generally ignored. 
On March 1, 1920 the network was finally returned to private ownership.  Unfortunately, companies were forced to spend heavily in repairing the damage incurred over the previous three years.  Because of this, railroads worked hard to prevent a future USRA takeover and was well-prepared when the country entered World War II in 1941. 
In an ironic twist; in 1918 the USRA handled only 2% more ton miles of freight than the previous year under private operation.  McAdoo was also forced to increase freight rates and passenger fares in an effort to keep ahead of rising costs.  For the USRA's many negatives, there were several positives, primarily in the area of standardization. 
Up until that time, the industry had few, aside from track gauge. Most railroads could not even agree on a standard boxcar dimension. 
Steam locomotives were all custom built to fit each, individual carrier's needs.  All of that changed with the USRA whereby McAdoo formed a special committee to oversee standard locomotive and car manufacturing.
During this time USRA oversaw construction of more than 2,000 locomotives and 100,000 cars to augment the national fleet.  The former came in a variety of designs with the heavy and light 2-8-2's being the most popular. 
In his book, "Railroads Across America: A Celebration Of 150 Years Of Railroading," author Mike Del Vecchio notes how Baldwin (the nation's largest locomotive manufacturer) was particularly skilled at mass production. 
Arquivo - 073
When the U.S. Army need 2-8-0's during the conflict, it built 300 in just a month and out-shopped nearly 2,000 by the war's end. 
Many railroad managers probably felt the industry would never return to private ownership but those concerns were alleviated when the Railway Administration Act became law on March 21, 1918. 
It specified that all lines would be returned to respective owner within 21 months of a peace treaty.   That held true after World War I ended on November 11, 1918.  On March 1, 1920 when the USRA's authority ended.  Unfortunately, it came with further ICC powers through the Esch–Cummins Act of February, 1920. 
This latest legislation enabled the ICC to approve or disapprove any merger and show just cause for any abandonment or cessation of service.  Many railroads were forced to continue operating money-losing branches for decades.
Finally, while the industry dealt with a changing political landscape, a new type of motive power made its debut. 
Since the late 19th century, electrically-driven locomotives had found limited use in particular applications, such as Baltimore & Ohio's Howard Street Tunnel in Baltimore, Maryland and New York Central's new Grand Central Terminal. 
Many were required to meet smoke abatement measures.  With the internal-combustion engine now in development, some began wondering if such a power plant could be used in railroad applications. 
In his book, "Vintage Diesel Locomotives," author Mike Schafer notes General Electric earned distinction as helping design America's first commercial diesel locomotive, Jay Street Connecting #4, manufactured in October, 1918. 
It carried a B-B wheel arrangement and produced 225 horsepower utilizing a V-8 diesel engine.  Several were built, in conjunction with the American Locomotive Company (Alco) and Ingersoll-Rand, although most were not considered a great success. 
During the 1920's, however, the technology was further refined allowing GE to produce a successful line of switchers.  




Página 17 - https://www.american-rails.com/i.html

Arquivo - 074
By comparison to the Second World War, American railroads in World War I, and their contribution to that effort, have received minimal literary coverage. 
Perhaps that is partially due to the industry's nationalization under the United States Railroad Administration (USRA) in late 1917 when the government worried private operation could no longer meet traffic demands.  Ironically, federal control managed only to move slightly more tonnage. 
Despite the USRA's heavy-handed measures, which severely strained track and equipment, it did oversee improvements in the area of standardization, particularly with locomotives and rolling stock.  
Prior to these efforts, railroads had only standardized when required such as track gauge, coupling (knuckle), and brakes (automatic air brake system). 
Interestingly, the first diesel locomotives were also tested at this time although did not see greater use (in switching assignments) until the mid-1920's.  The information here provides a brief look at railroading during the World War I period.
Despite 1916's record mileage, troubles were on the horizon.  Railroads found themselves in an increasingly changing landscape after 1910; many laws had been passed which significantly expanded federal oversight and the impact of early automobiles was being felt. 
The latter first hit the interurban industry, which peaked between 1912-1918.  Afterwards, these electrified rapid transit systems quickly declined and were all but obliterated by the Great Depression. 
With World War I's outbreak in mid-summer, 1914, railroads dealt with an increasing volume of traffic as supplies for U.S. allies flowed towards, and out of, eastern seaports. 
The industry was also dealing with other issues on the home front.  No longer able to freely set freight rates, controlled through the Interstate Commerce Commission after 1906, railroads were coping with thinner profit margins as costs had soared by some 30% since 1900.  In addition, operating expenses were outpacing general inflation. 
By 1914 several major carriers were struggling with financial difficulties: notably the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific; St. Louis-San Francisco Railroad (Frisco); New York, New Haven & Hartford; and Wabash. 
A crucial strike involving the four primary brotherhoods (engineer, firemen, conductors, and trainmen) occurred in 1916, which sought to reduce the regular workday from ten hours to eight.  It was not settled until March 19, 1917 at the U.S. Supreme Court, which sided with the unions.  On April 6, 1917 the United States formally entered World War I. 
In an attempt to prioritize freight shipments deemed essential for the war effort, the federal government's move brought an unintended consequence. 
Since most traffic moved from west to east, eastern terminals and yards became severely congested, resulting in a major shortage of some 158,000 freight cars by November of 1917. 
The unfolding calamity caused President Woodrow Wilson to take the unprecedented step of indirectly nationalizing the railroads through the United States Railroad Administration. 
Arquivo - 075
The new USRA went into effect on December 28, 1917.  The agency was led by William G. McAdoo, Secretary of the Treasury, who also had experience with railroads. 
As Jim Boyd points out in his book, "The American Freight Train," the move technically did not nationalize the industry although it did provide the USRA broad powers.  Instead, each railroad was rented and provided fair compensation for its cooperation.
As historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," they were paid via "the average of the net operating income for the three years between June 30, 1914, and June 10, 1917."  It was a tough pill for many owners to swallow considering those particular years had been especially difficult.
Essentially, competition was removed and the entire 254,000+ network operated as a single entity.  Managers were fearful the move would result in permanent federal control.  The industry had asked for a rate increase prior to federal takeover, which was denied by the ICC. 
Ironically, as costs began outpacing profits, McAdoo found himself in a difficult position and was forced to raise freight rates by 25% in the South and West as well as 40% in the East. 
In addition, as Dr.'s George W. Hilton and John F. Due point out in their book, "The Electric Interurban Railways In America," he authorized a 3 cent/mile rate increase for basic coach fares. 
Interestingly, the interurban industry predominantly avoided nationalization, largely due to the minor volume of freight it handled.  However, there were exceptions, such as the Fort Dodge, Des Moines & Southern, which moved considerable tonnage.   The industry would later establish its own committee during the war. 
Known as the Electric Railway War Board, it was formed in 1917 to aid in the war effort.  Unfortunately, since few interurbans handled either significant freight or troops, its purpose was largely moot.
From a historical standpoint, the USRA has been heavily criticized for its stringent measures whereby profits and general maintenance were ignored in an effort to keep the train rolling.  By war's end many railroads were completely worn out. 
Despite its issues, the agency set forth many standardized practices which forever benefited the industry, particularly when the Second World War broke out nearly twenty years later.  McAdoo immediately realized the national locomotive and car fleet could not meet needed demand. 
To remedy this, as well as streamline both the manufacturing and maintenance processes (and reduce costs), the USRA put together a mechanical committee featuring the industry's very best engineers.  They were tasked with standardizing locomotives and rolling stock which could be mass produced and operate on any railroad. 
The former came in a variety of arrangements (listed below) with main line power built as either "light" (axle loadings of 54,000 pounds) or "heavy" (axle loadings of 60,000 pounds) variants depending upon track conditions and intended usage. 
Arquyivo - 076
As can be seen, the 2-8-2 'Mikados,' utilized in everyday freight service, were the most popular.  There were also numerous switchers built. 
In all, including requisitioned 2-10-0's from Russia, more than 2,000 locomotives with USRA specifications were placed into service.
There were a total of 1,200 built but following the Bolshevik revolution of 1917, not all had been delivered and remained on U.S. soil.  As a result, they were retrofitted to USRA standards and placed into service.  Many proved so popular the survived until the steam era's end.
As Mr. Boyd notes, there were also more than 100,000 freight cars manufactured, most of which were boxcars.  In his book, "Freight Train Cars," author Mike Schafer points out these were largely composite in design, carrying both steel and wood (the superstructure, particularly the under-frame and latticework, was steel while wood was used in general carbody). 
As John H. White, Jr. highlights in his book, "The American Railroad Freight Car," steel witnessed increasing use during the early 20th century.  In 1905, just 8.6% of the nation's total car fleet featured some type of metal-work. 
This number had jumped to 51.8% by 1915 and 65.2% by 1920.  Interestingly, the USRA even designed a standard caboose, the so-called "Northeastern" variant, although it was never built. 
Interestingly, the Reading picked up the design and produced an all-steel version in 1924.  Several other carriers also went on to use this caboose, including the Western Maryland, Central Railroad of New Jersey, and Lehigh Valley. 
Many managers probably felt the industry would never been returned to private ownership but those concerns were alleviated when the Railway Administration Act became law on March 21, 1918. 
It specified that all lines would be relinquished by the government within 21 months of a peace treaty.   That held true after World War I ended on November 11, 1918.  On March 1, 1920 when the USRA's authority ended.  



Página 17 - https://www.american-rails.com/usra.html

Arquivo - 077
The United States Railroad Administration (USRA) was not exclusive to World War I. During the 1970's the similarly named United States Railway Administration (operating under the auspices of the Department of Transportation) was formed to create what became the Consolidated Rail Corporation. 
Better known as Conrail, this federally created railroad was tasked with saving the northeast's bankrupt systems, notably Penn Central.  The best remembered version of the USRA was that formed during the 'Great War,' which effectively nationalized the railroads. 
In many ways, the U.S. government was responsible for the gridlock due to recently passed legislation which prevented railroads from raising freight rates.  
Whatever the case, the USRA's few years of existence produced both pros and cons.  The agency was heavily criticized for its treatment of equipment, infrastructure, and general accounting whereby profits were ignored. 
Despite its problems it also set forth standardized practices which forever aided the industry, and helped prevent another federal takeover during World War II.  The information here offers a brief history of the USRA.
Regulation set into motion the transportation calamity which befell the nation during World War I.  While the government held its share of the blame, railroads were just as guilty for their arrogant, "public be damned" attitude. 
It began in 1887 with the Interstate Commerce Commission's creation which, for the first time, brought federal oversight to the industry. 
Initially, the ICC held little actual power but that soon changed, particularly through a series of acts passed after 1900; the Elkins Act of 1903 ended the use of rebates to protect competition and fair pricing and the Hepburn Act of 1906 expanded upon its predecessor providing the ICC primary authority in freight rate adjustments.
In short, railroads could not amend such without the agency's approval.  Finally, the Mann-Elkins Act of 1910 further increased the ICC's power by forcing railroads to show just cause for any rate hike.
The timing of these acts was particularly bad.  In mid-summer, 1914 World War I broke out across Europe and the United States subsequently sent millions of dollars in supplies to its allies.  Then, America itself entered the conflict on April 6, 1917.
Between 1900 and the war's outbreak, railroads endured rising operating expenses as costs outpaced general inflation.  However, with the ICC now controlling rates, they could not freely raise them. 
Every attempt was denied although he agency would eventually allow for a small 5% increase, which failed to improve the situation. 
As a result, historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," by 1915 over 40,000 miles of railroads were in default or receivership which included the Wabash; Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific; New York, New Haven & Hartford; and the St. Louis-San Francisco Railroad (Frisco). 
At the time, there was a total of $17.5 billion invested in the national network, of which roughly half was funded debt.  As the industry struggled, a major strike broke out among the leading crew unions in 1916 (engineers, firemen, conductors, and trainmen).  They sought a reduction in the workday from ten to eight hours. 
Arquivo - 078
With companies unwilling to budge, Congress and President Woodrow Wilson intervened to pass the Adamson Act, which essentially gave in to union demands.  
Not surprisingly, railroads sued but the legislation was upheld by the United States Supreme Court in 1917.  The next domino to fall was a major car shortage.  The issue had been building for months as traffic bound for European allies predominantly traveled from west to east. 
These countries would ultimately order some $3 billion of munitions from the United States.  With such an uneven traffic flow, cars stacked up in east coast ports awaiting shipment, essentially acting as rolling warehouses. 
The problem was further compounded by the U.S. government, which  stipulated high-priority shipments deemed essential to the war effort take precedence over general movements. 
By November, 1917 the issue caused the shortage to reach some 158,000 cars.  Unfortunately, railroads had partially caused this issue themselves due to a lack of standardized practices, inhibiting their ability to operate an efficient national network, particularly as their importance to the national economy had grown immensely. 
In 1880 there were roughly 93,000 miles in service, carrying operating revenues of $614 million with a total investment of $5 billion and 419,000 workers.  By 1916, mileage had jumped to the record which still stands, 254,037, with operating revenues of $3.353 billion. 
In addition, investment and total employees had ballooned to $21 billion and 1.701 million respectively. 
The industry attempted correct to the logistical issue themselves, under an initiative launched by Baltimore & Ohio president Daniel Willard who, as a member of the Advisory Commission of the Council of National Defense, suggested railroads be operated as a single system. 
It was similar to what the USRA ultimately did but would have been privately operated.  Unfortunately, the idea ran up against 1890's Anti-Trust Act.  As railroads continued to struggle, President Wilson felt he had no choice but to take the unprecedented step of nationalizing the industry. 
Naturally, the idea drew scorn and resentment from managers who balked at the concept.  Nevertheless, the new United States Railroad Administration went into effect on December 28, 1917. 
Historian Jim Boyd points out in his book, "The American Freight Train," the industry was technically rented and not nationalized with each railroad paid the average net operating income from 1914 through 1917. 
While true, with little choice in the matter, the term nationalization is applicable.  Interestingly, even some interurbans which handled a great deal of freight, were taken over.
Led by William G. McAdoo, Secretary of the Treasury (and President Wilson's son-in-law), who also had worked in the railroad industry, the USRA's primary purpose was to operate the 254,000+ mile network as a single entity. 
Arquivo - 079
To do this, McAdoo believed standardization was needed to achieve greater efficiencies and operational improvements. 
Up until that time, there had been few, largely due to fierce competition and monopolistic attitudes.  Since the industry's earliest days many promoters and leaders went to great lengths to avoid working with other railroads, failing to see the larger picture of how interchange and a unified, national network could actually increase overall earnings and profits. 
It was not until the 1880's that a uniform track gauge (4 feet, 8 1/2 inches) was finally settled upon.  The industry only elected to use the knuckle coupler and automatic air brake, devices which not only brought far greater operational cost savings but also significant safety improvements, when required to do so by the federal government in 1893. 
Into the early 20th century, railroads could not even agree on common boxcar dimensions and almost every company set forth its own practice in steam locomotive construction.  Needless to say, it was a trying time.
Despite its issues, the USRA set forth many standardized practices which forever benefited the industry, particularly when the Second World War broke out nearly twenty years later. 
Mr. Stover notes these changes, highlighting that between 1921 and 1940 the industry witnessed a 17% increase in freight car capacity, 50% increase in serviceable freight cars, 30% increase in ton miles, and 45% increase in train speeds.  All of this was achieved while requiring 31% less coal per 1,000 tons of freight handled. 
It was all thanks to McAdoo and a committee of experts who realized additional cars and locomotives were needed to meet demand. 
To remedy this, as well as streamline both the manufacturing and maintenance processes (and reduce costs), the USRA put together a mechanical committee featuring the industry's very best engineers. 
They were tasked with standardizing locomotives and rolling stock which could be mass produced and utilized by any railroad.  The former came in a variety of arrangements with main line power built as either "light" or "heavy" variants, depending upon track conditions. 
In all, including requisitioned 2-10-0's from Russia, more than 2,000 locomotives with USRA specifications were placed into service.  To read more about railroads in World War I please click here.




Página 17 - https://www.american-rails.com/1930s.html

Arquivo - 080
Railroads entered the 1930s with great uncertainty following 1929's stock market crash which caused a nationwide economic collapse. 
It resulted in major systems like the Rock Island (1933), Milwaukee Road (1935), Erie (1938), Chicago & North Western (1935), and New York, New Haven & Hartford (1935) all entering receivership.  Only the strongest managed to avoid bankruptcy. 
The industry was facing a terrible dilemma as both freight tonnage and the passenger market were down significantly.  The traveling public was abandoning trains for two primary reasons; the economy and the automobile's affordability. 
In an attempt to reignite interest, Union Pacific and Chicago, Burlington & Quincy devised the streamliner concept. 
These fast, colorful trainsets were an instant sensation and the entire industry took notice.  By the 1940's, many of the largest railroads were jumping on board, forever changing rail travel.  
The winds were also shifting in other ways.  During the 1920's, diesel locomotive usage was growing.  At the time, this new form of motive power was largely confined to switcher and secondary assignments. 
Then, in 1935, Electro-Motive unveiled a main line variant for passenger service.  It later expanded upon this with 1939's FT model for freight service. 
While initially skeptical most railroads which tested the demonstrator set were left completely mesmerized.  The days of steam were numbered... 
During the 1920's, railroads remained the dominant mode of transportation.  However, their monopoly was in jeopardy.  Historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," in 1895 a grand total of four automobiles were manufactured in the United States. 
But then, Henry Ford introduced the assembly line and, coupled with the internal combustion engine's introduction some years earlier, his Model T debuted on October 1, 1908. 
The machine's initial price tag of $850 put it within reach for some Americans.  However, it was Ford's continued drive to reduce costs which forever changed America. 
By 1925 the price had dropped to just $260, making the Model T easily affordable for many. 
Despite the nation's relatively poor road conditions the automobile was nevertheless convenient and immensely popular.  The public now had the freedom to travel when and where they pleased at little cost. 
Arquivo - 081
By 1927, some 15 million had been manufactured and vehicle registrations jumped from 3 million in 1916 to 23 million by 1929.  Air travel was also catching on, even though by 1939 this new industry was still in its infancy and transported only 2% of commercial passenger traffic.
Railroading's losses in the passenger market were staggering and immediate.  In 1916 the industry handled roughly 1 billion travelers.  This number had declined to just 700 million by 1930 and would be further reduced by another 35.7% during the next decade. 
Even by 1929 railroads realized the future of rail travel was bleak; that year they handled 34 billion passenger miles compared to the automobiles' 175 billion. 
Buses were a particular threat; they already controlled 15% of the commercial passenger market by 1929, a number which jumped to 38% by 1950. 
Such deep in-roads were already well understood by the dying interurban industry.  It was the first to feel these effects.  These electrified, rapid transit railroads sprang up in the 1890's and culminated into a 15,000-mile network by 1916. 
Unfortunately, their dependence on the most fickle [and unprofitable] of traffic (commuters), general poor construction, insignificant rate of return, and an extremely high operating ratio (as of 1924, it averaged 85%) resulted in their steep decline by World War I. 
By the early 1930's the industry was no longer recognized in its original form.  Most which did survive to World War II did so as short line freight railroads.
As Dr. George Hilton and John Due's point out in their authoritative book, "The Electric Interurban Railways In America," had Ford's Model T been unveiled just a few decades sooner, this unique aspect of American transportation would likely have never existed. 
For traditional railroads, so accustomed to handling most of the country's freight and passengers, they were unwilling to so easily throw in the towel. 
The streamliner era is, of course, the decade's best remembered moment, even in the midst of the Great Depression. It was also the most successful. In terms of rail travel's "Golden Age," streamliners were a relatively late concept. 
The movement also received a boost from the unique Art Deco era, which took off during the 1920's. Its form and function could be found in early diesel models like the EA, the M-10000, and the Pioneer Zephyr.  It was also employed liberally by interior car designers. 
As Mike Schafer and Joe Welsh note in their book, "Streamliners: History Of A Railroad Icon," Union Pacific conceived a radical new concept during the early 1930's; a high-speed trainset utilizing a 600 horsepower distillate engine provided by the Winton Engine Company.  
What the railroad dubbed simply as, "The Streamliner," was also the work of Pullman-Standard.  It's livery featured what Union Pacific called "Canary Yellow" and "Golden Brown," (the former chosen specifically for safety reasons) while accommodations were relatively modest featuring just a 60-seat coach and buffet-kitchen-observation. 
Capable of reaching 110 mph it was an immediate success that wowed and stunned the public.  Prior to its debut trains had largely been viewed as mundane machines used for transportation between two points. 
Arquivo - 082
Shortly thereafter the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy unveiled its Zephyr 9900 (later renamed the Pioneer Zephyr) at Philadelphia's Broad Street Station on April 18, 1934. It was also a three-car articulated design. 
The work of the Budd Company (a Pullman competitor), its prime mover was the Winton eight-cylinder 201-A diesel engine capable of 660 horsepower. 
The 197-foot train featured a simple, yet elegant, sloped nose to enhance its streamlining features with accommodations including the combined power car/Railway Post Office/mail-storage area, a baggage/coach, and a coach-parlor-observation.  The Zephyr held less seating, just 72 paying customers.
However, the CB&Q arguably boasted the much more reliable train since its diesel engine had fewer mechanical issues.  It also earned the greatest fanfare during its historic initial run on May 26, 1934.
That day the trainset left Denver at 5:05 AM in anticipation of reaching Chicago later that evening.  With an average speed of 78 mph it completed the 1,015-mile trip in just 14 hours, arriving in the Windy City at 7:10 PM. 
Just two years after these two pioneering streamliners were introduced the Electro-Motive Corporation unveiled its first stand-alone diesel locomotives. 
The 1930's were a fascinating time in locomotive development; steam power was reaching its technological apex with magnificent designs like the 4-8-4, 4-6-6-4, and "Duplex Drive" all in development at that time. 
The "Super Power" concept was also in full swing.  It describes late era variants, beginning with the 2-8-4, which featured larger fireboxes and super-heaters. 
The term has also been used to include new technological applications such as roller-bearings, mechanical stokers, and outside valve gear. In his book, "Vintage Diesel Locomotives," author Mike Schafer notes General Electric earned distinction as helping design America's first commercial diesel locomotive, Jay Street Connecting #4, manufactured in October, 1918.
The diesel was refined and improved until a fairly robust switcher market, largely controlled by American Locomotive, General Electric, and Electro-Motive, had been established by the 1930's.  Then the Electro-Motive Corporation (EMC) took things a step further. 
Arquivo - 083
According to the book, "The American Diesel Locomotive" by Brian Solomon, EMC's first main line models were three 1,800 horsepower boxcabs (utilizing two Winton 201-A, V-12 prime movers) unveiled in 1935. 
They featured a B-B wheel arrangement and weighed 240,000 pounds; two went to the Santa Fe (famously nicknamed "Amos & Andy" they were used on the "Chief" and operated as a pair, "Diesel Locomotive #1") and one, #50, to the Baltimore & Ohio. 
EMC also manufactured two demonstrator units, #511 and #512.  Two years later, their nearly identical streamlined cousins were acquired by the Baltimore & Ohio (listed as model EA) and, again, Santa Fe (E1). 
As EMC stated in 1925, "We're selling a standard car engineered by us, and bearing a standard price tag."  This proved quite true as Electro-Motive dominated the diesel market for the next six decades.   
While these early designs were somewhat successful it was not until the development of Electro-Motive's FT for main line freight service was the industry convinced of the diesel's true capabilities. Freight paid the bills and one by one, FT demonstrator set #103 made believers out of skeptics.
The A-B-B-A set encompassed four, individual locomotives which could produce a combined 5,400 horsepower.  Just like the original passenger "E" series models, the FT was gracefully streamlined. 
Its primary upgrade was the utilization of a new engine, General Motors' model 567, which made its debut in late 1938. 
Variants of this engine remained in production through the mid-1960's.  The #103 set embarked on an 11-month, 84,000 mile tour in November, 1939.  During that time it operated on 20 Class I railroads and visited 35 states. 
Believers in Electro-Motive (and ultimately long-time buyers of its locomotives), the B&O and Santa Fe both tested and purchased the FT.  Other notables included Chicago, Burlington & Quincy; Great Northern; Southern Railway; Boston & Maine; Chicago & North Western; and Missouri Pacific. 
As Mike Schafer notes in his book, "Vintage Diesel Locomotives," at the zenith of Electro-Motive's dominance the builder controlled a staggering 90% of the diesel locomotive market, worldwide. 
As 1940 dawned, diesels and streamliners were the order of day.  With new technologies rapidly evolving, America entered World War II on December 7, 1941. 
This time railroads were prepared for the onslaught of traffic and no government oversight was needed. Not only did railroads see record freight traffic during this time but also a passenger renaissance.  Without the railroads, victory in World War II would not have been possible.




Página 18 - https://www.american-rails.com/world.html

Arquivo - 084
Railroads proved vital in World War 2 as they kept millions of men and tons of materiel flowing.  Without their unwavering service, victory would have never been possible. 
It was a stark contrast from World War I where railroads' inability to coordinate and keep traffic moving resulted in a nationalized industry led by the United States Railroad Administration (USRA). 
While this organization was highly criticized for its handling of the nation's rail infrastructure it did set forth many standardized practices which greatly aided the private industry, particularly during the Second World War.  
The diesel locomotive's development, spearheaded by Electro-Motive's FT of 1939, was also a major boon.  However, only some railroads were able to acquire this new form of motive power before wartime restrictions precluded further construction. 
Nevertheless, the tried and proven steam locomotive performed flawlessly, enabling railroads to handle record freight and passenger traffic during the war years.
Following Germany's invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939, otherwise known as the September Campaign or Poland Campaign, evermore European countries found themselves under Nazi occupation. 
Germany's blitzkrieg was a new military tactic that caught many by surprise, particularly France which officially surrendered on June 22, 1940. 
On July 10th the Battle for Britain began, the last free European country.  Buffered by the English Channel and an unwillingness to give up, the Brits fought valiantly for their homeland. 
Realizing the severity of the situation but not willing to officially enter the war President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Congress authorized shipments of food, materiel, and other supplies to their beleaguered allies in September. 
While railroads witnessed a slight increase in freight tonnage (revenue ton-miles increased from 333.44 million in 1939 to 373.25 million a year later), it was not until Japan's surprise attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States formal entry into the war, did this increase astronomically.
While it took some time for America's industrial machine to come online, by 1942 the United States was fully engaged, producing everything from tanks and planes to ammunition and mortars. 
Transporting this desperately materiel would have not been possible without the railroads.  In 1941 revenue ton-miles increased to 475 million and then jumped to 637.99 million in 1942.  That year, Railway Age published a piece entitled "What We Fight For." 
It predominately discussed the American resolve, freedom, and our way of life.  In addition, it alluded to railroading's importance:
Arquivo - 085
"Our railroads are one of our finest examples of free private enterprise.  What they have achieved for the nation during the last two years, and are still achieving, in efficiency and economy, never has been, never could be, equaled in piece or war by any dictatorial government bureaucracy. 
For it is the result of thousands of widely-scattered free men exercising their full initiative and energy in free cooperation - which government bureaucracy, by its nature, prevents." 
Also, Lowell Jackson Thomas, a well known writer, actor, and broadcaster mentioned the industry's tremendous performance in a piece he wrote on May 12, 1942:
"I've seen a locomotive over 130 feet long, speeding war material over mountain grades.  I've watched troops unloading from train after train, powered by fast Diesel or Streamliners, some with 7,000 horsepower, the heaviest and most powerful ever made. 
And, I never witnessed a speed-up so swift, or so well directed, as men and women of America's railroads swarmed to their tasks of building even more powerful locomotives, laying more tracks, and organizing incredibly complex shipping schedules. 
We Americans needed a miracle in railroad transportation during early 1942, we expected that miracle, and, by George, we got that miracle!"
In comparison to the "Great War," railroads were far better prepared for World War II's traffic onslaught.  In 1996 Don DeNevi published a wonderful book entitled, "America's Fighting Railroads: A World War II Pictorial History." 
In over 135 pages he provides an in-depth look at just how vital they were to the war effort through numerous statistics, detailed text, and historic photos/advertisements. 
His work is a must read if you have any interest in this subject. Mr. DeNevi notes when America entered the war the industry boasted more than 41,000 locomotives and 2 million freight cars. 
In addition, the nation's rail network had dropped to under 230,000.  These figures were astonishing for what they didn't contain; roughly 50% less locomotives, 33% fewer cars, and some 25,000 fewer miles. 
As historian John Stover notes in his book, "The Routledge Historical Atlas Of The American Railroads," railroads did not want a repeat of World War I. 
They were quite eager to cooperate with the government and avoid federal control. (This did occur briefly when labor disputes led to a two-month takeover between December, 1943 and January, 1944.)
Railroads were also aided by improved technology, such as heavier freight cars, the new diesel-electric locomotive, and Centralized Traffic Control. 
Arquivo - 086
Otherwise known as CTC this contemporary signaling system gave dispatchers complete control over a section of track (known as a block) from a centralized location. 
Its efficiency enabled single track territory to achieve 75% capacity of a fully double-tracked corridor.  CTC was originally implemented in 1927 but with government assistance, hundreds of additional miles were upgraded over the next few decades. 
Railroads enjoyed a renaissance during World War II, reigniting its former dominance which had lasted through the 1920s. What's more, the industry's overall operating ratio declined to a record low of 67.5% while profits were so strong railroads repaid $2 billion in debt. 
As diesels witnessed their main line debut at this time the 1940's also signaled the technological zenith of piston-driven steam locomotives. 
Unable to purchase diesels due to wartime restrictions, Super Power designs and large articulateds like the 4-6-6-4 and Union Pacific's 4-8-8-4 "Big Boy" were common sights.
The Baltimore & Ohio, for instance, purchased its newest and last steam locomotives in the early 1940s.  Designated the EM-1 Class it was a 2-8-8-4 wheel arrangement, first put into service on the Northern Pacific in 1928. 
It carried a low boiler pressure which enabled a high factor of adhesion, enabling the locomotives to pull a considerable amount of freight (particularly over the West End's torturous grades, the fabled West End/Cumberland Division). 
The EM-1's did a marvelous job at their assigned tasks, having little trouble hauling merchandise or coal drags over the steep climbs of Cranberry Grade, along the West Virginia/Maryland border, or Sand Patch in Pennsylvania. It wasn't just the B&O. 
Arquivo - 087
As David Jones points out in his article, "The Joy And Thunder Days: On The Hectic Home Front, America's Railroads Saw Their Finest Hour As They Hauled A Nation To War" from the June, 1994 issue of Trains Magazine, the Pennsylvania Railroad manufactured several home-built J-class 2-10-4's and the Western Pacific 4-8-4's modeled after Southern Pacific's successful line of Class GS-6's.  
Railroading's importance was not confined solely to the movement of goods, military supplies, and troops. 
The general public also found their way back onto the rails.  While the Interstate Highway system was still decades away, even by 1941 most Americans were utilizing the automobile. 
As Mr. Jones further points out, at that time fully 89% of the public traveled intercity by car or bus with just 9% doing so by train. 
However, by 1944 these numbers had changed drastically to 63% and 34% respectively.  In addition, railroads handled no less than 64% of all intercity freight throughout the war, peaking at 72% in 1943. 
Railroad executives realized in the postwar era such strong numbers were unlikely to continue.  Nevertheless they remained hopeful that steps could be taken to lessen the impact.  Unfortunately, nothing proved successful, made worse by a government that had abandoned trains for highways.
Railroads did slow their pace of christening new streamliners during the war (in one particularly unfortunate instance the New York Central unveiled its Empire State Express, a service linking Buffalo and New York, on the morning of December 7, 1941). 
Afterwards, however, many new names appeared such as Milwaukee Road's Olympian Hiawatha, Baltimore & Ohio's Cincinnatian, and the legendary California Zephyr. 
The Central rebounded well during World War II and felt so good about its prospects it ordered 420 new lightweight, streamlined cars in 1945.  
This was in addition to 300 cars it had already ordered a year prior.  Mr. Schafer and Mr. Solomon point out in their book, "New York Central Railroad," the combined purchase (720 cars) was the largest single order, ever, for an American railroad.  The Pennsylvania Railroad spent a similar amount only to see its efforts prove futile. 
During the 1950s the industry watched helplessly as passenger traffic plummeted and not even new equipment and promotional advertising could sway the public.  The 1950s also saw a slow decline in freight traffic due to a national recession in 1957 and the new interstate highway system. 




Página 19 - https://www.american-rails.com/1950s.html

Arquivo - 088
The streamliner craze that was so prevalent during the 1930s had slowed down by the late 1940s, although train travel remained a popular mode of transportation for most during the decade.
However, following WWII and into the 1950s railroads watched helplessly as passenger traffic plummeted and not even new equipment and promotional advertising could sway passengers back to the rails. 
Some lines continued to spend money on new streamliners, such as the Pennsylvania Railroad, for passengers that never came.
The railroad industry after the 1940s also saw a slow decline in freight traffic, particularly less-than-carload (LCL) as the new interstate highway system began to take its toll. 
After the end of the war one of the first tasks set forth by many railroads was to retire the iconic steam locomotive as fast as they could. 
From a macro view, the 1950's was not good for the industry; aside from declining passenger business, a recession and improved highways (including signage of the Interstate Highway Act) heavily eroded the industry's traffic. 
The situation would not improve until the Staggers Act was passed in 1980, greatly deregulating the industry.
The efficiency of diesel locomotives could not be argued and most lines had completed the switch by the mid-'50s while all Class Is had abandoned steam by 1960. 
It would take the diesel-electric locomotive nearly fifty years to equal the horsepower output of the steam locomotive during its technological height.
However, diesels offered an advantage that far surpassed steamers and it was the deciding factor in them becoming the prime choice of motive power, efficiency.
Diesels required far less maintenance in terms of overhauls (scheduled time in the shops for routine maintenance) and refueling (no longer were there frequent stops requiring water and coal/oil), which allowed them to be spending much more time moving freight and paying the bills. 
Arquivo - 089
While diesels may have helped the industry save millions in locomotive maintenance the same could not be said for passenger operations.
With the explosion of traffic during the war and only a minor drop off through the end of the 1940s many railroads expected passengers to remain true to the railroads during the 1950s, which, unfortunately did not happen.
Some lines spent lavishly on new equipment like the New York Central ($56 million in 1946) and the Pennsylvania Railroad ($3 million in 1952). 
With President Dwight Eisenhower enacting the Interstate Highway System in 1956 (also known as the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act) and better highways and roads being built throughout the decade folks began to abandon trains for personal automobiles.
Before the automobile came into existence railroads owned almost 100% of passenger traffic in the country but by 1957 held just 31.4%.   A few stats regarding the decline of passenger railroading during these years: 
Between an 18-year span following the year after World War II, 1946, passenger traffic declined from 770 million to 298 million by 1964. 
By the '50s total industry losses on passenger rail service was over $700 million.
Commuter trains declined by 80% from over 2,500 in the mid-'50s to under 500 by the late 1960s. 
Despite these setbacks railroads of the era did have some notable gains. For instance, ton-mileage per railroad worker had doubled every fifteen years since the end of World War I. Also, the 1950s saw an introduction of a new type of service, TOFC or trailer-on-flat-car.
Arquivo - 090
This service allowed railroads to haul unit trains of truck trailers, which was extremely efficient and beneficial to both industries and remains a highly lucrative service today. What began as an experiment in 1953 (one of the first lines to do so was the Chicago Great Western Railway) saw fifty railroads trying or testing TOFC service by 1959.
And, track upgrades allowed for faster and heavier trains as mechanical machines began replacing track gangs, and rail of over 100 pounds covered more than half of all lines in operation by late in the decade. 
The '50s also saw the beginning of the mega-merger movement with one of the first being the Norfolk & Western Railway's purchase of the Virginian Railway in 1959.
While consolidations are a natural part of capitalism and the free market mergers began to increase in number by the middle of the decade partly because of the railroad industry's loss of market share to highways and airplanes.
For instance, the overbuilt Northeast was probably the hardest hit by this market share setback. The Northeast's collapse culminated with the Penn Central bankruptcy of 1970 but it all likely started in 1951 when one Northeastern line, the Lehigh Valley Railroad, showed its final profits. 
While the industry by the '50s was becoming more efficient it unfortunately did not stem the tide of losses, which only became worse a decade later. The decade saw many railroads in financial trouble as well as a number of mergers.
Names like the mighty Pennsylvania Railroad, New York Central, Chicago Great Western, Erie, Lackawanna, Seaboard Air Line, Atlantic Coast Line Railroad, and others would all disappear into merger in the 1960s.
Also, passenger rail services began to worsen as lines cut back on spending as folks continued to abandon trains for cars and airplanes. By 1970 only the most popular named trains like the Empire Builder and Super Chief still carried full service, including sleepers.


Página 20 - https://www.american-rails.com/1970s.html

Arquivo - 091
The modern movement to abandon our nation's railroads began in the 1960's and 1970's.  While railroading in the 1950s became more efficient it unfortunately did not stem the tide of losses, which only worsened through the 1960s.
The decade saw many railroads in financial trouble as well as a number of mergers. 
By that era, the industry had lost so much market share to trucking and airlines it could no longer remain solvent amid stifling government regulation; regulation that simply squeezed many companies out of business. 
Names like the mighty Pennsylvania, New York Central, Chicago Great Western, Erie, Lackawanna, Seaboard Air Line, Atlantic Coast Line, and others would all disappear into merger in the 1960s. 
In many ways our own federal government, through acts passed in the early 20th century and then ignored their abolition when no longer needed, is responsible for the decline of the world's greatest railroad network.
It all came to head during the 1970's when numerous lines were in bankruptcy, or carried out poor mergers approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission in an ill-fated attempt to reduce mounting debt. 
Unions like the Penn Central and Illinois Central Gulf are stark examples of this practice. 
In addition, passenger rail services worsened as lines cut back on spending as folks continued to abandon trains for cars and airplanes. 
By the decade's beginning only the most popular named trains like the Empire Builder and Super Chief still carried full service, including sleepers. It was not a good era for railroads and things continued to worsen, culminating with the Penn Central collapse of 1970.   
If the federal government of the era understood the industry and its plight; not only would there have been fewer bankruptcies and abandonments but several key corridors pulled up in their entirety would also still be in active service today. 
Railroads had a very bad 10 years during the '70s. As mentioned above, it was already off to a rough start with the creation of Penn Central in 1968, a company that had already declared bankruptcy by June of '70.
The result of this was a ripple effect throughout the entire Northeast, as other railroads that depended on the Penn Central to ferry traffic no longer had a means to move much of their freight.
These lines included names like Lehigh Valley, Reading Railroad, Lehigh & Hudson River Railway, Erie Lackawanna, and Delaware & Hudson Railway.
It became so bad that the Penn Central was facing total shutdown if financial assistance were not located. 
Realizing the severity of the situation the federal government stepped and setup the Consolidated Rail Corporation, which comprised the skeletons of several bankrupt Northeastern carriers, and began operations on April 1, 1976.
Arquivo - 092
With federal backing Conrail began to slowly pull out of the red ink (it took many years) and by the late 1980s was a profitable railroad after thousands of miles of access trackage was abandoned and/or upgraded.
Aside from the creation of Conrail, railroading in the 1970s saw Amtrak born as well. The early years of Amtrak were somewhat like a circus as it attempted to organize a chaotic system from the remnants of the private freight railroads' passenger operations. 
Relief for the railroads would finally come in the way of the National Railroad Passenger Corporation, or Amtrak, signed into law by President Richard Nixon in the way of the Rail Passenger Service Act, which began operations on May 1st, 1971. 
Some railroads like the Southern Railway and Denver & Rio Grande Western opted not to include their passenger operations in with Amtrak and others like the Rock Island could not afford to turn over their operations to the carrier but for the most passenger service provided by the private railroads ended forever after 1971.
With the creation of Amtrak the passenger rail network (or that which was remaining) dropped from 112,000 miles in 1957 to just 49,000. 
Aside from the creation of Conrail and the classic railroad companies which disappeared into its name others would be merged out of existence during the decade: Chessie System would become the corporate name of the Baltimore & Ohio, Chesapeake & Ohio, and Western Maryland in 1972.
Later, the marketing name of the Family Lines system gobbled up the Seaboard Coast Line, Louisville & Nashville, Clinchfield and other smaller lines while Burlington Northern was formed in 1970 from the Burlington, Northern Pacific, Great Northern and Spokane, Portland & Seattle; after a botched merger preceding by the ICC the Rock Island was liquidated in 1980.
These are just some of the biggest names to disappear, many smaller lines also went extinct at the time. Many railroads saw their intercity freight volume at near record lows to just 38.8% when in 1929 the industry had held roughly 75%.
Also, since the decade began it had witnessed freight ton-mile volume more than double from its 771 billion figure. While the industry's percentage base would drop slightly in 1980, since that time it has slowly improved to over 40% today. 
It was not a good time to be in the business during the '70s and many seemed to think that the industry was an outdated mode of transportation that needed to be replaced.
However, with the creation of the Staggers Act and deregulation of the industry things slowly began to change.
Now free to set their own rates and more open to abandon unneeded trackage railroads slowly began to recover. The mega-merger movement also continued during the 1980s as many more famous names like the Milwaukee Road,
Southern Railway, Norfolk & Western Railway, Rio Grande and others all disappeared during the decade.
While its been unfortunate to see these names gone forever railroads found a new role in the transportation market during the 1980s and today they play an extremely important role in moving goods and materials.




Página 21 - https://www.american-rails.com/today.html
Arquivo - 093
Railroading today, unlike what the industry witnessed between the end of World War II and 1980, has witnessed a renaissance with profits and ton-mileage steadily increasing.
Particularly in the 1970s times were not good and many seemed to think that the industry was an outdated mode of transportation that needed to be replaced.
However, with the creation of the Staggers Act and deregulation of the industry things slowly began to change. Now free to set their own rates and more open to abandon unneeded trackage railroads slowly began to recover. 
The mega-merger movement also continued during the 1980s as many more famous names like the Milwaukee Road, Southern Railway, Norfolk & Western Railway, Rio Grande and others all disappeared during the decade.
While its been unfortunate to see these names gone forever railroads found a new role in the transportation market during the 1980s and today they play an extremely important role in moving goods and materials. 
While bankruptcies and mergers saw many fabled companies disappear in the 1960s and 1970 the process only increased after 1980 with the Staggers Act. This act was named after Rep. Harley O. Staggers of West Virginia who originally sponsored it.
It was signed into law by President Jimmy Carter on October 14, 1980, which allowed enormous deregulation of the railroad industry.
Some of the advantages included allowing railroads to enter into contracts with shippers to set prices and services, both without ICC approval. Other incentives including allowing railroads to more freely abandon unprofitable lines.
One of the first to go was the fabled Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific (Rock Island), which was liquidated on January 25, 1980 after a strike crippled the railroad and it was unable to move freight. In 1980 there was over two-dozen Class I railroads still in operation. 
However, by 1990 that number had dropped to just nine; CSX Transportation, Norfolk Southern, Union Pacific, Southern Pacific, Conrail, Santa Fe, Burlington Northern, Illinois Central, and Kansas City Southern (by this time lines like the Florida East Coast and Chicago & North Western railroads were considered Class II, Regionals).
While famous, classic railroad companies steadily disappeared after 1980 the industry itself was on the rebound. Since 1980 rail freight ton-miles have steadily increased from 932 billion in 1980 to over 1.5 trillion in 2006. 
What's more is that market analysts and experts expect this number to continue to rise as shippers, and even trucking companies, look for more efficient and faster means of transporting their products with highways steadily becoming more choked and clogged. 
Between 1990 and 2000, however, we saw even more famous railroads disappear into merger, most notably the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway.
Arquivo - 094
In 1994 the Santa Fe agreed to merge with northwestern giant, Burlington Northern, to form the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway, who recently changed its name to simply the BNSF Railway.
With the merger thus ended one of the most famous railroads to ever operate worldwide although its legend will forever live on in the products bearing its name and famous "Warbonnet" livery. The Santa Fe, however, wasn't the only well-known railroad to disappear in the '90s.
In 1995 the Chicago & North Western Railway became another arm of the Union Pacific, the Illinois Central Railroad was purchased by the Canadian National in 1998, and in 1999 Conrail was split up among CSX and Norfolk Southern.
Since the fall of Conrail no other major mergers have taken place leaving North America with seven major Class Is; CSX, NS, BNSF Railway, UP, Kansas City Southern, CN and Canadian Pacific. 
With technological improvements such as continuous welded rail (CWR) in the 1950s and the widespread use of concrete ties, today company's can operate faster trains while at the same time reducing maintenance to both the track structure and equipment.
In the 1970s locomotives began to built with computer control systems and EMD's SD40-2, one of the most successful diesels of all time, is perhaps best remembered. In the 1990s both EMD and General Electric began constructing locomotives that employed alternating current (AC) traction motors.
While AC locomotives operate at lower speeds they produce vast amounts more of tractive effort making them ideal for drag service hauling coal over steep grades. 
Today, the newest locomotives are equipped with the latest electronics and are becoming increasingly more environmentally friendly as has been seen with GE's and EMD's newest models the Evolution Series™ and SD70ACe. Railroads of the present era are seeing a renaissance of freight traffic not experienced since World War II.
Freight ton-miles have more than doubled since the mid-1940s with railroads hauling 43% (the most) of all transportation types, and freight revenue reached $57 billion in 2007.
While coal still makes up nearly 50% of all freight revenue for railroads other commodities are also important to the industry such as chemicals, intermodal and agricultural products. 
Even though Amtrak over the years has operated almost entirely on “life support” with just enough funding to survive year to year, support for the carrier has increased, particularly in the post-9/11 era and it commonly breaks annual ridership records.
Along with Amtrak, state passenger railroading operations are gaining support and receiving increased attention and funding, particularly as highways become increasingly congested and gas prices skyrocket. Perhaps the two most noted states that are giving passenger railroading serious attention include North Carolina and California. 
Both are doing a magnificent job at developing passenger rail corridors in their respective states, particularly North Carolina.
As transportation issues are becoming more of a topic today, passenger and commuter rail are both gaining increasing support and its future looks very bright, as everything from local trolley systems to large state-supported passenger rail systems are being planned and developed.
Today's freight trains are a far cry from thirty to forty years ago when much of the public thought it an outdated mode of transportation that was no longer needed.
Now, today, it is as strong as ever and looks to be solidly entrenched as an important component of of our transportation network. 




Página 22 - https://www.american-rails.com/official.html

Arquivo - 095
The Official Guide Of The Railways was once the premier source for one traveling by train.  The publication, released each month during its height, was first produced by the Edward Vernon in 1868. 
In its most recognized form the Guide was published by the National Railway Publication Company of New York.
The publication included every common-carrier railroad in operation, whether they provided passenger service or not. 
For larger systems, a detailed map was included while smaller short lines typically only published the company's officers and route length.
There was a cost to be in the Official Guide and smaller companies simply did not have the means to include maps, timetables, and advertising within the publication. 
Following Amtrak's creation the Guide's need greatly diminished.  A greatly truncated version is still published today as The Official Railway Guide by RailResource.
Many may not realize the modern Official Guide actually predates the 1860's.  As far back as 1848, "Appleton's Railroad And Steamboat Companion: Being a Travellers' Guide Through The United States Of America, Canada, New Brunswick, And Novia Scotia," was published by the D. Appleton & Company of New York (edited by W. Williams).
While it did not include timetables, it did feature every railroad then in service with detailed map illustrations and associated fare costs.  It it is included here for research purposes.
The Official Guide Of The Railways was born through a need to provide an efficient source of scheduled passenger trains as rail service expanded across the country during the 1860's.
While the Civil War created uncertainty and tension throughout the United States the decade also witnessed the Transcontinental Railroad's completion in May, 1869.  This event not only linked the nation from coast-to-coast but also led to expanded rail service.
As it was under construction the Official Guide Of The Railways was first published in June, 1868 as the Travelers Official Railway Guide Of The United States And Canada.
Arquivo - 096
It was produced and edited by Edward Vernon (a former ticket agent of the St. Louis, Alton & Terre Haute Railroad) and H.H. Wheeler.  The original publication was 278 pages in length, not including the station index. 
As you will see in the included PDF's of these guides, they were more than just railroads and timetables.  You could also find steamship schedules and, in later years, even air line schedules.
Since timetables changed regularly the publications were produced monthly.  In the coming decades it would grow significantly as rail service, corridors, and companies continued to expand rapidly.  
It is said the "Golden Age" of rail travel occurred from roughly the start of the 20th century until around 1920.   This is reflected in the Official Guide from January, 1910 in which there were 1,159 pages, excluding the station index, which was an additional 216 pages.
Following the start of Amtrak in May, 1971 the need for the Official Guide greatly diminished and, among the public, essentially ended for all intents and purposes.  With private rail service having ceased the Guide's need did as well.
The Official Guide published more than just U.S. railroads; it also included Canadian lines, and even Mexican carriers.  It is somewhat fascinating to realize that this single publication offered the traveling public concise information regarding how to reach virtually any point across North America.
In a way it was the modern-day version of GPS.  As rail travel diminished in availability after World War I, larger railroads continued to feature every line.  However, any corridor that had ceased passenger service was listed as "Freight Service Only."
At the time, most of the general public thought little of these new designations.  However, as time passed they have become invaluable historical tools understanding which towns a railroad served along a particular branch, the length of that particular corridor, and mile posts.
For the purposes of this article, PDF's of historic Official Guide Of The Railways will be featured for research purposes.  They are available here free of use. 
It primarily features routing and shipping information for freight services only; it includes no information concerning passenger trains or rail travel.  You will need to visit Amtrak's website for long-distance rail travel scheduling, costs, and accommodations.





Página 23 - https://www.american-rails.com/np.html

The Northern Pacific Railway is often overshadowed by the Transcontinental Railroad.  The latter was completed by the Union Pacific (UP) and Central Pacific (CP) in 1869, running the 42nd parallel between Omaha, Nebraska Territory and Sacramento, California. 
It offered the West its first efficient means of transportation for greater economic opportunities.  For all the Transcontinental Railroad's accolades, the NP carried its own great story.  It undertook a similar endeavor to reach the Pacific Northwest but did so without the aid of federal loans. 
At first, it appeared the railroad would be built without difficulty as noted banker Jay Cooke secured several million dollars in financing.  However, fortunes soon turned and the NP slipped into bankruptcy. 
As Northern Pacific languished it seemed unlikely the project would ever be finished. In time, several individuals stepped forward and oversaw its completion, thus establishing the first through route to the Puget Sound. 
After 1900, fabled tycoon James J. Hill gained control and the NP joined his so-called "Hill Lines" which included the Great Northern; Chicago, Burlington & Quincy; and subsidiary Spokane, Portland & Seattle. 
After numerous attempts the four became one in 1970 when Burlington Northern, Inc. (BNI) was formed.  Today, NP's unique Yin Yang herald has vanished but segments of its network remain in service under successor BNSF Railway.
The Northern Pacific is a very old tale involving great hardship and struggle.  Many individuals came together in overseeing its completion. Although never celebrated like the Transcontinental Railroad it was nevertheless instrumental in opening another area of the country to new possibilities. 
Following its completion along the 49th parallel the states of North Dakota and South Dakota (November 2, 1889), Montana (November 8, 1889), Washington (November 11, 1889), and Idaho (July 3, 1890) all joined the Union.  As these former territories were settled and their cities grew, an ever-increasing volume of freight and passengers flowed over Northern Pacific's rails. 
Its early years were defined by financial difficulty due to very high construction costs.  This endured for nearly two decades until James Hill, the "Empire Builder," acquired control and NP's future was secured.  At its zenith it connected the Twin Cities and Duluth/Superior with Spokane, Seattle, Portland, and other western points. 
In later years it operated a fine fleet of trains, including the North Coast Limited and Mainstreeter, while also whisking patrons to and from Yellowstone National Park.  Interestingly, its immediate heritage can be traced all the way back to another important event in American history, Lewis and Clark's expedition. 
The Northern Pacific's route closely followed this fabled journey which departed from St. Louis in May of 1804.  The two individuals responsible for the historic endeavor included Captain Merriweather Lewis and Lieutenant William Clark, both Virginians. 
According to the book, "The Northern Pacific, Main Street Of The Northwest: A Pictorial History" by author and historian Charles R. Wood, President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the men to document newly acquired western lands from France (the Louisiana Purchase) to:
"...explore the Missouri River, and such principal stream as, by its course and communication with the waters of the Pacific Ocean, whether the Columbia, Oregon, Colorado, or any other river may offer the most direct and practicable water communication across the continent for the purpose of commerce." 
They returned to St. Louis on September 23, 1806 and while their trek yielded invaluable information, thoughts of a railroad were still decades away. 
The first such proposals began in 1853 when then-Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (who later became president of the Confederate States of America) was tasked with surveying routes to the Pacific Coast.
In the end, eight different options put forth running various parallels from north to south.  These included the 49th, 47th, 42nd, 41st, 39th, 38th, 35th, and 32nd.
Each had its pros and cons although, unfortunately, politics overshadowed everything.  Tensions between Northern and Southern states were nearing a crescendo and the ongoing issue of slavery precluded any progress regarding a transcontinental railroad.  It all boiled over when Abraham Lincoln was elected president on November 6, 1860, a man despised in the South. 
Only weeks later, South Carolina formally seceded from the Union (December 20, 1860); several others soon followed, Confederate forces opened fire on federal troops stationed inside Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor on April 12, 1861, and the Civil War was upon the nation.  
With the country in turmoil the North now had the freedom to choose whichever route it wished and settled on the central option along the 42nd parallel.  It was not long before stirrings of a second line along a northern trajectory also gained momentum. 
These efforts were led by senators from Northern states and, in particular, Josiah Perham, an eastern railroad promoter.  Following great effort he secured a rare federal charter for the Northern Pacific Railroad Company.  This bill later passed both houses of Congress and was signed into law by President Lincoln on July 2, 1864. 
Unfortunately, despite many attempts neither Perham nor other politicians could garner enough support for government loans.  These would have greatly aided the enterprise but the Transcontinental Railroad had cost so much money Washington soured on the idea of funding another such undertaking. 
While the Northern Pacific was awarded land grants it would have to raise the needed capital on its own. It was further handicapped by being unable to mortgage the property.  In the end, Perham's efforts went nowhere and the charter lay dormant for years.  A new individual then joined the project, J. Gregory Smith. 
After he also failed to achieve federal support he attempted to woo prominent Eastern/Midwestern railroaders.  They also showed little interest.  Smith's efforts did, however, procure two important changes; an extension of NP's completion date (July 4, 1877) and an approval to mortgage. 
The latter was particularly important as it meant $100 million in construction bonds could be immediately sold.  The project now had some merit which saw Jay Cooke and his banking firm, Jay Cooke & Company, enter the picture.  
He had made a name for himself during the Civil War by selling war bonds throughout the United States and Europe.  After coming on board his banking company, in essence, gained control of the NP.  In the summer of 1869 more surveys were carried out on a planned route running west from Lake Superior. 
It would pass through the Twin Cities of Minneapolis/St. Paul, head through the Dakotas and Montana (then territories), and reach Spokane.  From that point the corridor would head southwesterly towards the Columbia River and follow it into Portland, Oregon. 
Finally, what was dubbed the "Cascade Branch" would be built due west through Washington and penetrate the Puget Sound region.  The entire project was estimated to cost more than $85 million.  The railroad began construction from Thomsons Junction, slightly west of Duluth, on February 15, 1870. 
Here, the NP met another Cooke-controlled subsidiary, the Lake Superior & Mississippi, which had opened to St. Paul/Duluth via a southwesterly heading.  Within two years, Cooke had managed to sell an impressive $30 million and, by 1872, the NP was opened to Bismarck, Dakota Territory (450 miles).  In addition, a western component was completed between Kalama and Tacoma, Washington Territory (roughly 100 miles).
For a moment it seemed the entire scheme might actually be finished relatively quickly.  However, bond sales soon slowed to a trickle and Gregory Smith, then NP's president, resigned in August, 1872. 
As the company's fortunes failed to improve both Jay Cooke's firm and the railroad slipped into bankruptcy on September 18, 1873 setting off a chain reaction of bank failures, causing the United States to slip into a depression. 
With a bleak future, along with a woefully inadequate traffic base, it appeared the railroad's fate was sealed.  As officials fought off Congressional attempts to revoke NP's land grants they managed to complete a short western branch from Tacoma to Wilkeson where coal was discovered (financed entirely through the road's earnings back east).  The company was subsequently reorganized in 1875 and came under the control of eastern capitalists. 
As Mike Schafer notes his book, "More Classic American Railroads," these new owners paved the way for the crucial financing needed to see its completion through $40 million in new bonds. 
As the economy slowly recovered so did NP's earnings power; first, a subsidiary known as the Western Railroad Company of Minnesota completed a direct link between Sauk Rapids and Brainerd, which offered a through route from those points into St. Paul.
The next priority involved finishing the railroad before its latest Congressional extension (July 4, 1879) expired.  If not, the government had authorization to cancel its charter.  While the NP ultimately failed to meet this deadline, revocation of its charter proved extraordinarily difficult and was never successfully carried out. 
In the meantime, work resumed on all fronts and by 1880 it appeared the project would, at long last, be finished.  However, as was so often the case during that era, powerful interests worked very hard to block or stall the effort. 
These parties, notably the Union Pacific, managed to preclude NP from obtaining further extensions on its deadline while Henry Villard, who owned the very successful Oregon Railway & Navigation Company (OR&N), tried to keep it out of the Pacific Northwest. 
At the time, Villard's OR&N (incorporated on July 13, 1879), controlled all trade along the Columbia River through a combination of steamboats and rail service. 
But, when it appeared increasingly unlikely that he could stop Northern Pacific's advance, the wealthy businessman purchased control of the railroad in 1881 through a new holding company known as the Oregon & Transcontinental Company.
Villard's ownership, though, did not amend NP's outlook as it pressed on towards completion (which still required more than 900 miles of new construction).  There were changes, however.  The biggest involved the western approach; instead of building its own line, Villard's OR&N was utilized along the Columbia River. 
As NP's progress continued westward, it breached Bozeman Pass within Montana's Belt Mountains via a 3,610-foot tunnel completed on October 28, 1882. 
Less than a year later, during June of 1883, rails arrived in Helena.  Things became more difficult as crews dealt with the rugged topography of western Montana and northern Idaho. 
Some of the most impressive engineering feats here included O'Keefe's Canyon Trestle (1,800-feet long and 112-feet high), Marent's Gulch Trestle (860-feet long and 226-feet high), and the 3,850-foot tunnel over Mullan Pass. 
Like all of the West's major transcontinental railroads, construction crews witnessed incredible hardship but those in charge persevered; workers from the east met their western counterparts in Hell Gate Canyon (near Helena) on August 23, 1883.  A final spike ceremony was held in Gold Creek, Montana on September 8th where a number of high ranking dignitaries, some as far away as Europe, were on-hand to see the event. 
It also marked another major milestone in American history as the country now enjoyed two routes to the Pacific coast.  But for its many accolades, the Northern Pacific had still not fulfilled its charter by directly serving the Puget Sound. Utilizing the OR&N to reach Tacoma would not suffice. 
Furthermore, this connection was not indefinitely guaranteed when Villard resigned as NP's president in 1884 (the OR&N would eventually wind up under rival Union Pacific's control by 1887). 
To remedy this situation, officials began construction on the so-called, 248-mile "Cascade Branch" that year where grading commenced due west from Pasco, Washington on July 1, 1884. 
It headed in a northwesterly direction away from the Columbia River and carried relatively gentle grades until it neared Ellensburg.  Here, it met the formidable Cascade Mountains and required even more impressive engineering accomplishments. 
The most spectacular was the tunnel over Garfield Pass, later known as Stampede Pass, which sat at an elevation of 2,852 feet.  The completed bore was 1.8 miles in length and completed on May 27, 1888. 
By this time work had already been finished across the remainder of the branch and the Northern Pacific finally enjoyed a direct route to the Puget Sound.
Following the railroad's opening it added several hundred miles in secondary branches to increase freight business.  In the end, Northern Pacific's independence was short-lived due, in part, to its excessive debt load brought about through its construction.
By 1890 this number had soared to over $100 million and the financial Panic of 1893 led to its second receivership on August 15th.  It was reorganized on March 16, 1896 as the Northern Pacific Railway.  In 1893, James J. Hill, the "Empire Builder," had completed his own railroad to the Puget Sound, the Great Northern Railway. 
As his portfolio continued to expand the book, "The Great Northern Railway, A History," by authors Ralph W. Hidy, Muriel E. Hidy, Roy V. Scott, and Don L. Hofsommer notes that he acquired control of longtime rival Northern Pacific in late 1900.  He then added the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy a year later for through service into Chicago.   
The NP later regained a direct routing into Portland when subsidiary Spokane, Portland & Seattle Railway opened between its namesake cities in 1908.  At its peak, Northern Pacific's network stretched just over 6,800 miles; it contained 2,831 main line miles and 4,057 miles of secondary (branch) lines. 
As with all the "Hill Lines," NP was a well-managed railroad that generally enjoyed successive years of profitability.  It retired its final steam locomotive from main line service in January of 1958.  Over the years its network was modernized in other ways with the addition of computers, microwave, and installation of centralized traffic control (CTC) in 1947.  
There had been several attempts to merge the "Hill Lines" into a unified network dating back to the early 20th century.  In 1955 informal talks were again launched between the three allying railroads about regarding this issue. 
This led to a formal application filed with the Interstate Commerce Commission on February 17, 1961 which would bring together the Northern Pacific, Great Northern, and Chicago, Burlington & Quincy into the previously-named conglomerate. 
It would comprise 24,500 miles and include leasing the Spokane, Portland & Seattle for a period 10 years before its absorption into the parent company.  In typical ICC fashion the process was slow and tedious. 
Finally, on March 31, 1966 the agency surprisingly voted against the merger in a 6-5 decision.  Undeterred the three railroads continued to push forward. 
A great hurdle was cleared when they worked out an agreement with the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific whereby their only transcontinental competitor was afforded eleven new western gateways.
This strategic opportunity provided the Milwaukee Road bountiful new sources of interchange traffic, particularly in conjunction with the Southern Pacific at Portland.  With this issue resolved the ICC reopened hearings on January 4, 1967. 
Later that year, on November 30th, the merger was approved by an 8-2 vote.   As the process the railroad's name was formally changed to Burlington Northern, Inc. (BNI) during April of 1968.  After overcoming a bit more legal work and objections the four railroads finally became one at 12:01 AM on March 2, 1970.




Página 24 - https://www.american-rails.com/union.html

The Union Pacific (UP) is one the largest and most powerful railroads in the country.  This historic system has been in operation since before the Civil War and much of the general public has at least a general knowledge of UP since it formed the eastern segment of the Transcontinental Railroad.  
In that time the railroad has become not only one of the most highly respected institutions in the nation (it currently ranks as a top Fortune 150 company) but also has seen nearly every major railroading event and milestone in our country’s history.  
Except for a troubled period at the end of the 19th century when an overextended Union Pacific fell into receivership the company has been well-managed through the years.  Thanks to the its forward thinking, during the postwar period UP began gobbling up smaller, and larger, railroads.  
These moves propelled it into becoming the massive and successful system it is today, serving most states and communities west of the Mississippi River.  
Featured here is a brief history of one of America's great corporations. You probably know the story of the Transcontinental Railroad, Union Pacific's role, and how it opened the West to vast economic opportunities.  
However, you may not be aware that UP has blossomed into one of America's great success stories, similar to Coca-Cola, General Electric, and the Ford Motor Company.  
The concept for what eventually became Union Pacific has its roots in the spring of 1853 when then-U.S. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis (who later became president of the Confederate States of America) began surveying western routes beyond the Mississippi to link the Pacific Coast as part of the government's endeavor to complete a transcontinental line. 
According to the book, "The Northern Pacific, Main Street Of The Northwest: A Pictorial History" by author and historian Charles R. Wood there were a total of eight different options put forth running along various parallels from north to south.  Due to the ongoing issue of slavery, Congress could not come to a consensus on which. 
However, following the outbreak of hostilities, a unified Northern delegation decided upon a central option along the 42nd parallel.  
In addition, just before the war broke out, Abraham Lincoln became the country's 16th President.  With the routing chosen Congress passed the Pacific Railroad Act of 1862, signed into law by President Lincoln on July 1, 1862.
This event corresponded with Union Pacific's incorporation although some time passed before construction actually commenced.  As you can see the railroad was born largely through the government and as such carried considerable startup capital, something most other ventures then did not enjoy.  
Despite such perks the entire project was complex and arduous; as other historians have noted it was similar in difficulty to placing a man on the moon a century later.  
While some states had been created when construction began, such as California, Kansas, Nevada, and Oregon there was no infrastructure in place to assist the project; virtually everything had to be hacked out of the wilderness while dealing with angry Native Americans who were extremely upset with the White Man's invasion into their ancestral hunting grounds (the U.S. Army eventually had to be called in to protect the project).
The 19th century was part of the United States' great industrial revolution, of which the railroads were key.  The growing and expanding country established great manufacturing centers in the Northeast while the South generated prodigious volumes of cotton and textiles.  
As the railroad proved its value in the 1830s, and then blossomed into the fastest and most efficient means of transportation the world have ever seen, new economic centers such as Chicago, Indianapolis, and St. Louis flourished across the Midwest.  
Realizing its vast potential, the government funded the Transcontinental Railroad's construction.  Its intended goals included opening the West, encouraging settlement and trade, and improving national defense by providing better protection along its coastal borders.  
As Joe Welsh and Kevin Holland note in their book, "Union Pacific Railroad," following the Transcontinental Railroad's completion the journey from New York to San Francisco was sliced from six months to just ten days.
While Congress mandated Union Pacific specifically to build the line's eastern leg, the western segment was the job of Central Pacific.  This system had been organized by Collis P. Huntington, Mark Hopkins, Leland Stanford, and Charles Crocker (the so-called "Big Four") on June 28, 1861. 
It was directed to "construct a railroad and telegraph line from the Pacific coast, at or near San Francisco, or the navigable waters of the Sacramento River, to the eastern boundary of California."  With the passage of the Pacific Railroad Act the CP adopted the agreement on October 7th and formally accepted it through the Department of the Interior on December 24th.
During 1863, UP turned the first mound of soil from Omaha, Nebraska and set out westward.  This, in itself, was an interesting starting point since the railroad was still disconnected from the national rail network; Omaha and Council Bluffs, Iowa were separated by the mighty Missouri River and it was not until 1872 that a new bridge opened across the waterway, linking UP with what was later the Chicago & North Western and other carriers.
The new Union Pacific was led by President John Dix with Vice-President Thomas Durant second in command.  Durant quickly asserted himself as the leading authority although he technically was in charge only of UP's construction.
 A sly individual set upon enriching himself, he and several associates formed Credit Mobilier in 1864, originally known as the Pennsylvania Fiscal Agency a loan and contract company created in 1859.  Mobilier would be used as the conduit upon which monies were distributed to Union Pacific for its construction.  
Perhaps not surprisingly this setup was greatly abused; Durant used the company to grossly overcharge UP and the government for contract work, nearly driving the railroad into bankruptcy. The extra profits were then simply pocketed by Durant and his partners. The issue wasn't resolved until 1872 although little punishment was ever handed down to those involved in the corruption.  
By late 1865 UP had spent $500,000 but laid only 40 miles of track.  Then project engineer quit in frustration and Durant subsequently hired Greenville Dodge to replace him.
Dodge proved far better at dealing with Durant and often ignored his boss if he felt it was in the best interest of the company.  As a result, UP's western line rushed quickly across the plains, building up to 8.5 miles of new railroad per day.  
However, in doing so corners were cut including poor grade construction, weak bridges, and lack of sufficient tie usage.  Only later, under better leadership, were these issues corrected.  Despite the initial shoddy construction it was incredible the logistics the project overcame in seeing the route completed.  
Since the region carried few trees, and of course no way to manufacture rails, these all had to be shipped in from the East.  According to Dodge it was so well organized that at no time did crews run short on supplies.  
The only real issue the railroad dealt with was keeping the men focused; all along the route towns sprang up to accommodate the workers during downtime.  They usually spent this freedom drinking in bars and enjoying brothels, until moving on to the next settlement.  As Welsh and Holland note in their book this led to the term "hell on wheels."  
An American Western television series of the same name was loosely based on the phenomenon and the Transcontinental Railroad's construction.  It aired from 2011 to 2016 on AMC.   Another, somewhat less scandalous incident, took place as the two roads neared one another.  
In an effort to stake more land from the government and pocket even more money, Union Pacific and Central Pacific actually began grading lines past one another!  
The silliness was finally put to end when the two formally met at Promontory, Utah on May 10, 1869 with a symbolic driving of a golden spike (however, a golden spike was not actually pounded into the railroad tie as gold is much too soft).  
The event took place at 12:47 p.m. that day and was performed by Leland Stanford.  Interestingly, even now sections of these never-used grades can be seen.  
The completion of the Transcontinental Railroad was one of the great achievements in American history and was so famous that Western Union carried out lived updates.   When the final spike was driven the word "done" was wired across the country.
The Union Pacific’s original main line is the Overland Route, which runs between Ogden, Utah; Omaha, Nebraska; and Chicago.  The future of the Union Pacific is as wide open as the great western plains where the railroad operates.
However, if the company’s past is any measure of what may happen in the years ahead, I think we can safely say that when the merger movement picks up again the railroad, and its famous shield logo, will continue to flank locomotives during their daily task of moving goods across the country. 
It is also important to note the company's nod to its history.  Union Pacific operates an impressive heritage fleet of original equipment from its streamlined business train clad in its classic Armour yellow and gray to its stable of steam locomotives maintained at its roundhouse in Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
When Union Pacific elected to save one its Class FEF 4-8-4s as steam operations wound down during the 1950s it planted the seeds of what is today considered one of the greatest heritage fleets across the country, and perhaps the world. 
That locomotive was #844 and today it is a household name throughout the railfan community having hosted numerous special excursions over the many decades as the only steamer never officially retired from a Class I railroad. 
Since then UP has added several classic steam and diesel models to its roster, most of which are housed in its shops and roundhouse at Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
The most spectacular addition occurred during 2013 when UP announced it would acquire one of the fabled 4-8-8-4 Big Boys for the fleet, often regarded as one of the largest and most powerful examples of traditional steam designs ever built.
The traffic strains felt by World War II meant that many railroads were struggling to avoid power shortages.  This issue was no different for the Union Pacific. 
Needing additional and more powerful locomotives for passenger operations UP went to the American Locomotive Company (Alco) requesting a batch of 4-8-4s.  The first arrived in 1937, given Class FEF-1, and numbered 800-819. 
While UP would have liked new diesels wartime restrictions prevented this.  In any event, the new Northerns were able to save the railroad some $300,000 annually at a cost of roughly $10-$11 per mile.  During 1939 UP purchased additional examples, Class FEF-2's #820-834, and completed the roster with the Class FEF-3's of 1944, #835-844. 
After the war diesels soon supplanted steam and the Northerns, despite their advanced technologies and cost savings, were bumped to freight assignments.
In 1954 UP began retiring the first of the 4-8-4s although the locomotives continued to see service through 1962.  At this time the end of steam on the railroad appeared imminent. 
However, in a move unique only to UP the railroad spared #844 following her final freight assignments performed in 1959.  A year later the Northern began hosting special excursions from its base of operations in Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
This location, an important division point on the UP with a large roundhouse and turntable, became the permanent home of the locomotive.  In 1961 new Electro-Motive GP30s arrived, which were given the 800 numbering series and forcing the Northern to be reassigned as #8444 for a time. 
One of its most notable excursions during these early years included Ross Rowland's Gold Spike Special to celebrate the centennial of the transcontinental railroad completion on May 10th, 1969.
Since then the 4-8-4 has become the most visible public relations ambassador on the Union Pacific system, hosting numerous excursions annually, leading the business train during various outings, and/or sitting on display for special events such as the College World Series in Omaha and the annual Cheyenne Frontier Days. 
Beginning in 1977 UP added to its steam program when restoration was launched on 4-6-6-4 #3985 and completed through an all-volunteer effort by 1981.  To celebrate the restoration the Challenger was sent to Railfair '81 at Sacramento to help showcase the opening of the California State Railroad Museum that year. 
The big articulated was used on several outings and excursions from its completed restoration in 1981 until 2010 when the locomotive was sidelined for major overhaul. 
The biggest news regarding the steam program occurred in 2013 when UP announced it would acquire one of the largest and most powerful designs ever built, 4-8-8-4 "Big Boy" #4014 which had set on display in Pomona, California since the early 1960s. 
It was chosen since the locomotive was in relatively good condition and will certainly become the star attraction on the railroad regardless of how often it leaves the roundhouse.  After it was moved to Cheyenne in 2014 the locomotive began its complete restoration in 2016. 
This work was completed in May, 2019 and the 4-8-8-4 embarked on a PR campaign that exceeded even the railroad's restoration.  It is estimated its trips (which concluded in November, 2019) drew an estimated 1 million+ trackside to see the massive locomotive.
There are also some other notable heritage pieces kept at Cheyenne including one of the largest diesels ever constructed, Electro-Motive DDA40X Centennial #6936.  This locomotive remains operational and also occasionally pulls excursions. 
Additionally, UP's fleet of streamlined E9s normally assigned to the business train call there for maintenance as do its restored, lightweight cars.  Finally, there are two other steamers, both of UP heritage albeit non-operational, kept at the roundhouse including 2-10-2 #5511 and 4-8-4 #838.
Ed Dickens, the head of Union Pacific's steam program offered a little more insight regarding why 4-6-6-4 #3985 is now permanently retired (made official in January, 2020 but retroactive to May, 2019):
"A quick update regarding the UP 3985.  Information has been released as far back as May of this year [2019] regarding its current status...Which is...officially retired.  
As mentioned during that time there are no plans to restore the UP 3985.
Having fired and operated that locomotive many, many thousands of miles this is not the news that you or I want to hear.  But I feel most everyone understands having two steam locomotives on the roster has historically been the norm on the Union Pacific.  This is still the case.
As time permits we may release additional information on exactly why that locomotive has not operated since 2010.  Many years of hard operation has resulted in the locomotive requiring a complete frame up restoration just as the big boy [sic] received recently."
After the Transcontinental Railroad opened much work remained in upgrading the property for heavy rail service and pushing rails across other parts of the West.  The Union Pacific did not immediately blossom into a wealthy system but it was rich in land and used this to its advantage.  
When constructing its original main line an amended Pacific Railroad Act of 1864 authorized 12,000 acres of land grants for every new mile constructed.  
In 1873 noted tycoon Jay Gould acquired a controlling interest in UP and set about upgrading its infrastructure while expanding its reach.  Just a year after doing so he purchased controlling interest in the nearby Kansas Pacific Railway, providing UP with a southerly line linking Denver with Kansas City.
It was formally consolidated in 1880.  At the same time expansions continued through Utah reaching Salt Lake City in 1870 (via the Utah Central) and Butte, Montana in 1881 (Utah Northern).
In the 1880s, UP began its push into the Pacific Northwest; by 1883 it was operating more than 400 miles into Idaho via the main line at Granger, Wyoming through a subsidiary known as the Oregon Short Line.  
Gould's interest in the railroad ended in 1884 although this did not slow its expansion efforts; it gained control of the nearby Oregon Railway & Navigation Company in 1887 which offered new access points such as Portland and Pendleton, Oregon as well as Spokane, Washington.  
In 1890 the railroad formed a subsidiary known as the Union Pacific, Denver & Gulf Railway; this massive entity provided connections from Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas to Orin Junction, Wyoming linking cities such as Denver, Pueblo, Cheyenne, Amarillo and others along the way via a north-south routing. 
There was also narrow-gauge property that ran from Golden up Clear Creek to Central City and Silver Plume, Colorado.  In all, it comprised roughly 1,600 miles of trackage.  
Alas, the rapid expansion would severely cost the company; it was far too overextended in debt and fell into receivership in 1893.  Union Pacific was not alone in this regard as several other railroads had experienced similar set backs which led to the great financial Panic of 1893.  
The UP's resulting bankruptcy broke up its network when sold at foreclosure on November 1, 1897.  Then, E.H. Harriman (Edward Henry "Ned" Harriman), along with a group of investors, stepped in to acquire the former Transcontinental main line between Omaha to Ogden for $110 million.  
As one of the industry's great businessmen, still highly respected today, his leadership saw Union Pacific rebound and flourish.  
He spent more than a decade reacquiring most of the railroad's lost trackage (although the former lines south of Colorado and into Texas were reorganized as the Colorado & Southern, which eventually entered the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy's fold) and vigorously upgraded the property for modern-day operation into the 20th century.
As Welsh and Holland note in their book, by 1909, at the time of Harriman's death (September), its traffic density had increased 186% from thirteen years prior.  
Aside from infrastructure upgrades and new equipment, the company's major developments leading up to World War I included the consolidation of its lines in the Pacific Northwest and a new link to Los Angeles.  
The former included more than twenty subsidiaries which were brought together under the title of two holding companies; the Oregon Short Line Railroad and Oregon-Washington Railroad & Navigation Company.  In addition, its line into Southern California proved one of its most important acquisitions.  
It was originally known as the San Pedro, Los Angeles & Salt Lake Railroad incorporated in 1901 through several subsidiaries linking its namesake cities (renamed the Los Angeles & Salt Lake Railroad after 1916).  Following a long battle with William Andrews Clark who wanted his own route to Salt Lake City, UP and Harriman signed an agreement for a 50% interest in the SPLA&SL.  
On August 25, 1916 it changed its name to the aforementioned LA&SL and on April 27, 1921 UP acquired full control from Clark.  On January 1, 1936 these systems, and others, were formally consolidated into the railroad.
Even by the early 20th century, Union Pacific was a highly respected company thanks to Harriman's visionary leadership.  It had even controlled Southern Pacific between 1901 and 1912 before a Supreme Court decision forced the road to divest its holdings due to antitrust laws.  
UP had spent millions upgrading its subsidiary but alas the efforts had largely went for naught.  In an ironic twist, it would outright purchase the SP just before century's end. The Great Depression of late 1929 hit the country, and industry, hard as financial institutions and the economy collapsed.  
However, thanks to the UP's sound business practices it weathered the storm relatively well, even continuing to pay a dividend during that time. It earned a great deal of publicity by making history with the country's first radical and sleek streamliner trainset, delivered to the railroad on February 25, 1934.  
It was a product of Pullman-Standard and the Winton Engine Company, given the moniker M-10000.  While UP greatly enjoyed the publicity the train's purpose was a dollars and cents approach to bring passengers back to the rails, a tactic that largely worked into the early postwar period.
Union Pacific survived the onslaught of traffic brought about by World War II.  During that time it took delivery of 25 new 4-8-8-4's from the American Locomotive Company between 1941 and 1944.  
Their nickname became "Big Boy" when an unknown Alco worked scrawled the name in chalk on one of the locomotive's smoke boxes during production.  They were one of the most powerful steamers ever produced and began a trend of Union Pacific operating enormous locomotives.  
Into the diesel era such variants included the U50 and U50C (General Electric), DDA40X "Centennial" and DD35/A (Electro-Motive), and the C855 (another Alco model).  It also tested gas turbine locomotives during the 1960s, a joint project from Alco/GE named "GTELs" (Gas Turbine Electric Locomotive).  
The whole point behind these monsters was an attempt at ways to reduce operating costs by either slicing down the number of locomotives required per train or operate longer trains.  After the war UP realized passenger service was on the decline although remained strong enough into the 1950s that it continued purchasing or upgrading its fleet.
The company continued the latter program into the 1960s, offering the public some of the best and most luxurious trains during a time when most other carriers were significantly cutting back their services.  Its City trains were unmatched, used by Hollywood and other dignitaries for many years.  
In the Chicago - California transcontinental market the only true competitor was the Santa Fe, which fielded its own fleet of highly-regarded streamliners.  To maintain top-notch service, UP began systemically retrenching and combining its "Domeliners."  
By September of 1969 the City of Denver, City of Kansas City, City of Portland, City of San Francisco, and City of Los Angeles (along with the Challenger) were all combined into one large train east of Green River, Wyoming.  
While the move was a logical one (in 1946 the railroad reported nearly $65 million in passenger revenues, which was down to just $14.6 million by 1968), for those who followed the railroad they dubbed it the "City of Everywhere."  
Finally, the government stepped in to form Amtrak in 1971, alleviating most carriers of the burden (today, you can still glimpse the City streamlines in Union Pacific's business train).
The present-day Union Pacific system began taking shape in the 1960s.  By then, UP understood that growth was the only way to remain one of the West's preeminent systems.  
This was further realized when Northern Pacific; Great Northern; Chicago, Burlington & Quincy; and the Spokane, Portland & Seattle all merged in early 1970 to form the huge Burlington Northern system.  In 1960 UP began the initial steps to merge with the Rock Island in an effort to provide it a direct link to Chicago.  
However, protests from other carriers was fierce and the governing body, the Interstate Commerce Commission, took more than a decade to render its decision, announcing the union could proceed in 1974.  
By then, the Rock was in such a dire financial condition that UP was no longer interested.  The fabled Midwestern road was liquidated in 1980 and parts were purchased by surrounding carriers, which ironically included Union Pacific.
In 1980 President Jimmy Carter signed the Staggers Act into law which greatly deregulated the railroad industry making it easier to set freight rates, abandon unprofitable lines, and carry out mergers.  
Union Pacific subsequently acquired Missouri Pacific and the Western Pacific.  In 1988 the company grew even larger when it purchased the Katy (the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad) and in 1995 did the same with the Chicago & North Western, providing it access to Wyoming's Powder River Basin coal fields.
Finally, just a year later in 1996 it purchased the gigantic Southern Pacific, a one-time powerhouse that by then was a company far removed from its glory days, so much so that it had been purchased by the Denver & Rio Grande Western in 1988.  
Today’s UP is much different from the system predating 1980 as it operates as far north as Seattle, as far west as Los Angeles/Long Beach, as far east as Minneapolis, and as far south as Dallas, Brownsville, and New Orleans (and about every west in between!).  
According to Union Pacific, as of 2015 the company boasts the following credentials; 32,100 route miles, 44,500 employees, and an annual revenue of $22.832 billion as of the 2018 fiscal year.  
For the general public UP operates the aforementioned business train and several historic steam locomotives including the never retired 4-8-4 #844, 4-6-6-4 #3985, and the recently acquired 4-8-8-4 "Big Boy" #4014. 
The latter is of particular note; when Union Pacific officially announced its intentions to restore this steamer on July 23, 2013 the railfan community was shocked and the news made headlines in the media.  The move from its longtime resting place in Ponoma, California has also been widely watched and documented. 
Few ever thought it possible to see a Big Boy under steam again given their incredible size and the expense to do so.  On May 2, 2019, after three years of restoration, the big locomotive made its initial test run from Cheyenne to Greeley, Colorado.  It went on an incredibly successful PR campaign throughout the 2019 season that saw more than 1 million folks come out to see the big locomotive. 




Página 25 - https://www.american-rails.com/cab-forwards.html

Cab Forwards were a very distinct locomotive found, worldwide, only on the Southern Pacific in use over the Sierra Nevada mountain range as well as the railroad's main line between Dunsmuir, California to Portland, Oregon.
The locomotive looks as if it is backwards and facing the wrong direction. However, this design was quite deliberate with its purpose being to keep train crews away from the thick smoke and dangerous gases that would build up in the numerous tunnels and snow sheds found in the Sierras. 
Along with Cab Forwards protecting crews from smoke and gases the unique locomotives were also quite powerful and had tremendous tractive effort to battle the region's steep grades.
Today, only one example of these magnificent machines remains preserved at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento; Southern Pacific 4-8-8-2 #4294 which is housed in-doors at the facility.
Likely the most unique, but very effective, steam locomotive design ever conceived and built was the Southern Pacific's Cab Forwards, which would go on to be one of the signature features of the "Espee."
Initially a Mallet-type steam locomotive, the Cab Forwards have their beginnings around 1908 when the Southern Pacific ordered two Mallets of the 2-8-8-2 arrangement to negotiate the very steep Sacramento Division (with grades of 2.5% in some spots), a 150-mile stretch of main line over the Sierra Nevada.
Because this main line runs through high mountain passes it was, and still is in some areas, lined with numerous snow sheds.
It quickly became apparent that these snow sheds wreaked havoc on train crews since traditional steam locomotives have cabs located at the back near the tender and they caught the brunt of the exhaust, which was very dangerous and could cause asphyxiation.
This issue was particularly brought to light when the two Class MC-1 Mallets mentioned above, #4000 and #4001, were put into service between Roseville and Sparks, California north of Sacramento.
While incredibly more powerful than any other locomotive on the Espee's roster at that time the steamers not only magnified the asphyxiation issue but also damaged the snow sheds by blowing off roof boards due to the speed and velocity of smoke exiting the stacks.
The latter issue was corrected relatively easily with a stack splitter that deflected the fumes to the sides of the roof and decreased their velocity. However, the former problem could not be solved and in the meantime train crews were becoming fed up with the breathing and visibility issues.
In some ways the development of the Cab Forward was brought on by the train crews themselves.
Soon after the MC-1s entered service an engineer took it upon himself to improve conditions for the crew by turning the locomotive around and running the unit backgrounds, pulling the train through the tunnels.
While this worked it placed the engineer on the wrong side of the tracks to properly see the signals. Despite the inherent safety issue this caused other crews followed suite and the SP worked quickly to come up with a solution to the problem.
The railroad teamed up with Baldwin to produce the Class MC-2 2-8-8-2s, the first true Cab Forwards. These locomotives were numbered 4002-4016 and interestingly, were never tested before being put into service!
The design utilized a cab located to the front of the locomotive, which would keep the crew entirely clear of smoke and exhaust.
The locomotives were first put into service between February and March of 1910 and the Mallets ability to feature a cab at the front was thanks to oil as a primary fuel source, which was piped all of the way from the tender to the firebox.
The idea worked fabulously, solving the Southern Pacific's issues of mountainous operations with large steamers. The only real issue of the Cab Forwards during operation was crews' apprehensiveness of a grade crossing accident due to the cab being the first part of the locomotive to potentially strike a vehicle.
Thankfully, no such incidents ever occurred with the locomotives during their four decades of operation.  While the 2-8-8-2s were the first to utilize the Cab Forward design the SP owned four different wheel arrangements with such setups including 2-8-8-2s, 4-6-6-2s, and 4-8-8-2s (Yellowstones turned-backwards).
The early 2-8-8-2 and 4-6-6-2 built between 1910 and the late 1920s were not nearly as powerful as the later 4-8-8-2s of the AC-4 through AC-12 classes built in 1930 through 1942 (for instance 65,000-90,000 pounds of tractive effort compared to 124,000 pounds).
In all, Southern Pacific would eventually end up with a whopping 256 Cab Forwards in all different classes.
While the final AC-10/12 classes built in the early 1940s only saw a little more than a decade of service all of the locomotives proved very reliable and up to the task of moving heavy tonnage over the Sierras.
Sadly, however, diesels slowly replaced them occurred on November 30, 1956 when Class AC-10 #4211 pulled a freight from Oakland to Davis.
Thankfully, one of these extremely unique locomotives has been preserved, #4294 (the very last Cab Forward ever built) where in May of 1981 it was named a National Historical Mechanical Engineering Landmark and today resides at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento.   




https://www.american-rails.com/beginning.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1840s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1850s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/civil.html
https://www.american-rails.com/chase.html
https://www.american-rails.com/trnscntl.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1870s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/sp.html
https://www.american-rails.com/crpcf.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1877.html
https://www.american-rails.com/first-aid-kit.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1880s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1890s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1900s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1910s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/i.html
https://www.american-rails.com/usra.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1930s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/world.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1950s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/1970s.html
https://www.american-rails.com/today.html
https://www.american-rails.com/official.html
https://www.american-rails.com/np.html
https://www.american-rails.com/union.html
https://www.american-rails.com/cab-forwards.html


https://www.american-rails.com/tehachapi.html
https://www.american-rails.com/lucin.html
https://www.american-rails.com/denver-and-rio-grande-western.html
https://www.american-rails.com/union-pacific.html
http://railroad.lindahall.org/essays/brief-history.html
https://www.american-rails.com/charles-crocker.html
https://www.american-rails.com/collis-p-huntington.html
https://www.american-rails.com/leland-stanford.html
https://www.american-rails.com/mark-hopkins.html
https://www.american-rails.com/atsf.html
https://www.american-rails.com/ererr.html
https://www.american-rails.com/drgw.html
https://www.american-rails.com/narrow-gauge.html
https://www.american-rails.com/interurbans.html
https://www.american-rails.com/streamliners.html
https://www.american-rails.com/grte.html
https://www.american-rails.com/delaware.html
https://www.american-rails.com/baltimore.html
https://www.american-rails.com/camden.html
https://www.american-rails.com/mohawk.html
https://www.american-rails.com/sccrr.html
https://www.american-rails.com/fallen-flags.html
https://www.american-rails.com/stampede.html
https://www.american-rails.com/diesel.html
https://www.american-rails.com/steam.html
https://www.american-rails.com/2526.html
https://www.american-rails.com/mainstreeter.html
https://www.american-rails.com/burlington.html
https://www.american-rails.com/milw.html
https://www.american-rails.com/butte.html
https://www.american-rails.com/challenger.html
https://www.american-rails.com/111112.html
https://www.american-rails.com/cyla.html
https://www.american-rails.com/105106.html
https://www.american-rails.com/99100.html
https://www.american-rails.com/101102.html
https://www.american-rails.com/103104.html
https://www.american-rails.com/columbine.html
https://www.american-rails.com/49er.html
https://www.american-rails.com/gdcst.html
https://www.american-rails.com/idahoan.html
https://www.american-rails.com/portland-rose.html
https://www.american-rails.com/34.html
https://www.american-rails.com/southern-pacific.html
https://www.american-rails.com/2-6-6-2.html
https://www.american-rails.com/2-8-8-2.html
https://www.american-rails.com/2-8-8-0.html
https://www.american-rails.com/big-boy.html
https://www.american-rails.com/2-6-6-6.html
https://www.american-rails.com/4-6-6-4.html
https://www.american-rails.com/yellowstone.html


